---
tags:
  - CMPA
  - QNA
  - INC
title: Mock Boards 2023
date: 2024-10-28
draft: false
description: Sample questions and their rationalizations based on an old pre-board mock exam from the University of Santo Tomas (apparently)
password: '"ust-exam-10-28"'
showDate: false
---
# Foundations of Nursing
The nurse in-charge in the labor and delivery unit administered a dose of terbutaline to a client without checking the patient's pulse. The standard that would be used to determine if the nurse was negligent is:
1. The physician's orders test
2. The action of a clinical nurse specialist who is a recognized expert in the field.
3. The statement in the drug literature about the administration of terbutaline.
4. The actions of a reasonably prudent nurse with similar education and experience.

A nurse is caring for a female client with a history of GI bleeding, sickle cell disease, and a platelet count of 22,000/mm³. The female client is dehydrated and is receiving D5 0.45NSS at 150 mL/hr. The client complains of severe bone pain and is scheduled to receive a dose of morphine sulfate. In administering the medication, the nurse avoids which route?
1. Intravenous
2. Intramuscular
3. Oral
4. Subcutaneous

The physician writes the following order: "Digoxin .125 mg P.O. od". To prevent a dosage error, how should the nurse document this order onto the medication administration record?
1. "Digoxin .1250 mg P.O. once daily"
2. "Digoxin 0.1250 mg P.O. once daily"
3. "Digoxin 0.125 mg P.O. once daily"
4. "Digoxin .125 mg P.O. once daily"

A newly admitted female client was diagnosed with deep vein thrombosis. Which nursing diagnosis should receive the highest priority?
1. Ineffective peripheral tissue perfusion related to venous congestion
2. Risk for injury related to edema
3. Excess fluid volume related to peripheral vascular disease
4. Impaired gas exchange related to increased blood flow

A nurse is assigned to the following clients. The nurse would see which patient first after endorsement?
1. A 34-year-old postoperative appendectomy client of five hours who is complaining of pain.
2. A 44-year-old myocardial infarction client who is complaining of nausea
3. A 26-year-old client admitted for dehydration whose intravenous line has infiltrated
4. A 63-year-old postoperative abdominal hysterectomy client of three days whose incisional drainage is saturated with serosanguinous fluid

A nurse places a client in a four-point restraint following orders from the physician. The client care plan should include:
1. Assess temperature frequently
2. Provide diversional activities
3. Check circulation every 15 to 30 minutes
4. Socialize with other patients once a shift

A male client who has severe burns is receiving H₂ receptor antagonist therapy. The nurse in charge knows the purpose of this therapy is to:
1. Prevent stress ulcers
2. Block prostaglanding synthesis
3. Facilitate protein synthesis
4. Enhance gas exchange

The doctor orders hourly urine output measurement for a postoperative male client. The nurse records the following amounts of output for two consecutive hours: 8 AM - 50 mL; 9 AM - 60 mL. Based on these actions, what actions should the nurse take?
1. Increase the IV fluid infusion rate
2. Irrigate the indwelling urinary catheter
3. Notify the physician
4. Continue to monitor and record hourly urinary output

A basketball player twists his right ankle while playing and seeks care for ankle pain and swelling. After the nurse applies ice to the ankle for 30 minutes, which statement by the player suggests that ice application has been effective?
1. "My ankle looks less swollen now."
2. "My ankle feels warm."
3. "My ankle appears redder."
4. "I need something stronger for pain relief."

The physician prescribes a loop diuretic for a client. When administering this drug, the nurse anticipates that the client may develop which electrolyte imbalance?
1. Hypernatremia
2. Hyperkalemia
3. Hypokalemia
4. Hypervolemia

Some managers have a benevolent-authoritative style of management. Which of the following is an example of this type of management?
1. Have condescending trust and confidence in their subordinates
2. Gives economic and ego awards
3. Communicates downwards to staffs
4. Allows decision-making among subordinates

The nurse is aware that the following is true about functional nursing:
1. Provides continuous, coordinated and comprehensive nursing services
2. One-to-one nurse patient ratio
3. Emphasize the use of group collaboration
4. Concentrates on tasks and activities

Which type of medication order might read "Vitamin K mg I.M. daily x 3 days?"
1. Single order
2. Standard written order
3. Standing order
4. Stat order

A female client with fecal impaction frequently exhibits which clinical manifestations?
1. Increased appetite
2. Loss of urge to defecate
3. Hard, brown, formed stools
4. Liquid or semi-liquid stools

A nurse prepares to perform an otoscopic examination on a female client. For proper visualization, the nurse should position the client's ear by:
1. Pulling the lobule down and back
2. Pulling the helix up and forward
3. Pulling the helix up and back
4. Pulling the lobule down and forward

Which instruction should a nurse give to a male client who is having external radiation therapy?
1. Protect the irritated skin from sunlight
2. Eat 3 to 4 hours before treatment
3. Wash the skin over regularly
4. Apply lotion or oil to the radiated area where it is red or sore

In assisting a female client for immediate surgery, the nurse in-charge is aware that she should:
1. Encourage the client to void following preoperative medication
2. Explore the client's fears and anxieties about the surgery
3. Assist the client in removing dentures and nail polish
4. Encourage the client to drink water prior to surgery

A male client is admitted and diagnosed with acute pancreatitis after a holiday celebration of excessive food and alcohol. Which assessment finding reflects this diagnosis?
1. Blood pressure above normal range
2. Presence of crackles in both lung fields
3. Hyperactive bowel sounds
4. Sudden onset of continuous epigastric and back pain

Which dietary guidelines are important for a nurse to implement in caring for a client with  burns?
1. Provide a high-fiber, high-fat diet
2. Provide a high-protein, high-carbohydrate diet
3. Monitor intake to prevent weight gain
4. Provide ice chips or water intake

A nurse will be administering a unit of whole blood. Which priority information should the nurse have about the client?
1. Blood pressure and pulse rate
2. Height and weight
3. Calcium and potassium levels
4. Hemoglobin and hematocrit levels

A nurse witnesses a client sustain a fall and suspects that the leg may be broken. Which priority action will the nurse take?
1. Take a set of vital signs
2. Call the radiology department for an x-ray
3. Reassure the client that everything will be alright
4. Immobilize the leg before moving the client

A male client is being transferred to the nursing unit for admission after receiving a radium implant for bladder cancer. The nurse in-charge would take which priority action in the care of this client?
1. Place the client on reverse isolation
2. Admit the client into a private room
3. Encourage the client to take frequent rest periods
4. Encourage family and friends to visit

A newly admitted female client was diagnosed with agranulocytosis. The nurse formulates which priority nursing diagnosis?
1. Constipation
2. Diarrhea
3. Risk for infection
4. Deficient knowledge

A male client is receiving total parenteral nutrition when they suddenly demonstrate the signs and symptoms of an air embolism. What is the priority action of the nurse?
1. Notify the physician
2. Place the client in a Trendelenburg position
3. Place the client in a high-Fowler's position
4. Stop the transfusion

A nurse attends an educational conference on leadership. The nurse is sitting with a nurse employed at a large trauma center who states that the leadership employed there is task-oriented and directive. The nurse determines that the leadership used at the trauma center is:
1. Autocratic
2. Laissez-Faire
3. Democratic
4. Situational

The physician orders DS 500 cc with KCl 10 mEq/liter at 30 cc/hr. The nurse in-charge is going to hang a 500 cc bag. The KCl supply is 20 mEq/10 cc. How many ccs of the KCl formulation will be added to the IV solution? Answer to one decimal point.
1. 0.5 cc
2. 5 cc
3. 1.5 cc
4. 2.5 cc

A 10-year-old child is to receive 400 cc of IV fluid in an 8 hour shift. A Soluset is used. Determine the gtts/minute used to regulate this infusion.
1. 50 gtts/min
2. 55 gtts/min
3. 24 gtts/min
4. 66 gtts/min

The nurse is aware that the most important nursing action when a client returns from surgery is:
1. Assess the IV for type of fluid and rate of flow
2. Assess the client for the presence of pain
3. Assess the Foley catheter for patency
4. Assess the dressing for drainage

Which of the following vital sign assessments may indicate cardiogenic shock secondary to myocardial infarction?
1. BP— 80/60 mm Hg, Pulse— 110, Irregular
2. BP— 90/50 mm Hg, Pulse— 50, Regular
3. BP— 130/80 mm Hg, Pulse— 100, Regular
4. BP— 180/100 mm Hg, Pulse— 90, Irregular

Which is the most appropriate nursing action in obtaining a blood pressure measurement?
1. Take the proper equipment, place the client in a comfortable position, and record the appropriate information in the client's chart
2. Measure the client's arm if you are unsure of the cuff size to use
3. Have the client recline or sit comfortably in a chair with the forearm at the level of the heart.
4. Document the measurement, which extremity was used, and the position the client was in during measurement.

Asking the questions to determine if the person understands the health teaching provided by the nurse would be included during which step of the nursing process?
1. Assessment
2. Evaluation
3. Implementation
4. Planning and Goal-setting

Which of the following items is considered the single most important factor in assisting the health professional in arriving at a diagnosis or determining the person's needs?
1. Diagnostic test results
2. Biographical date
3. History of present illness
4. Physical examination

In preventing the development of an external rotation deformity of the hip in a client who must remain in bed for any period of time, the most appropriate nursing action would be to use:
1. Trochanter roll extending from the crest of the ileum to the midthigh
2. Pillows under the lower legs
3. Footboard
4. Hip-abductor Pillow

Which stage of pressure ulcer development does the ulcer extend into the subcutaneous tissue?
1. Stage I
2. Stage II
3. Stage III
4. Stage IV

When the method of wound healing is one in which wound edges are not surgically approximated and integumentary continuity is restored by granulations, the wound healing is termed:
1. Second Intention Healing
2. Primary Intention Healing
3. Third Intention Healing
4. First Intention Healing

An 80-year-old male client is admitted to the hospital with a diagnosis of pneumonia. The nurse learns that the client lives alone and has not been eating or drinking. When assessing the client for dehydration, the nurse would expect to find:
1. Hypothermia
2. Hypertension
3. Distended neck veins
4. Tachycardia

The physician prescribes meperidine (Demerol), 75 mg IM q4° prn for postoperative pain. The package insert states "Meperidine, 100 mg/mL". How many mL of meperidine should the client receive?
1. 0.75 mL
2. 0.60 mL
3. 0.50 mL
4. 0.25 mL

A male client with diabetes mellitus is receiving insulin. Which statement correctly describes an insulin unit?
1. A common measurement in the metric system
2. The basis for all solids in the avoirdupois system
3. The smallest unit of measurement in the apothecary system
4. A measure of effect rather than a standard measure of weight or quantity

A nurse measures a client temperature of 102°F. Converting it into Celsius, the nurse finds the reading to be equal to:
1. 40.1°C
2. 38.9°C
3. 48°C
4. 38°C

The nurse is assessing a 48-year-old client who has come to the physician's office for his annual physical exam. One of the first signs of physical aging is:
1. Accepting limitations while developing assets
2. Increasing loss of muscle tone
3. Failing eyesight, especially close vision
4. Having more frequent aches and pains

The physician inserts a chest tube into a female client to treat pneumothorax. The tube is connected to water-seal drainage. The nurse in-charge can prevent chest tube air leaks by:
1. Checking and taping all connections
2. Checking patency of the chest tube
3. Keeping the head of the bed slightly elevated
4. Keeping the chest drainage system below the level of the chest

A nurse must verify the client's identity before administering medications. She is aware that the safest way to verify identity is to:
1. Check the client's identification band
2. Ask the client to state their name
3. State the client's name and ask the client to repeat it
4. Check the room number and the client's name on the bed

The physician orders D5W, 1000 mL to be infused over 8 hours. The IV tubing delivers 1 mL every 15 drops. What rate will the nurse regulate the IV infusion at?
1. 30 gtts/min
2. 32 gtts/min
3. 20 gtts/min
4. 18 gtts/min

If a central venous catheter accidentally disconnects, the nurse immediately performs which action?
1. Clamp the catheter
2. Call another nurse
3. Call the physician
4. Apply a dry sterile dressing to the site

A female client was recently admitted. She has a fever, weight loss, and water diarrhea. While assessing the client, a nurse inspects the abdomen and notices it is slightly concave. Additional assessment should then proceed in which order?
1. Palpation, Auscultation, then Percussion
2. Percussion, Palpation, then Auscultation
3. Palpation, Percussion, then Auscultation
4. Auscultation, Percussion, then Palpation

A nurse is assessing tactile fremitus in a client with pneumonia. For this examination, the nurse uses:
1. Fingertips
2. Finger pads
3. Dorsum of the hand
4. Ulnar surface of the hand

Which type of evaluation occurs continuously throughout the teaching and learning process?
1. Summative
2. Informative
3. Formative
4. Retrospective

A 45-year-old client with no family history and risk factors of breast cancer should have a mammogram every how often?
1. Twice per year
2. Once per year
3. Every two years
4. Once, to establish a baseline

A male client has the following arterial blood gas values. The nurse expects which condition?

| Component        | Laboratory Result |
| ---------------- | ----------------- |
| pH               | 7.30              |
| PaO₂             | 89 mm Hg          |
| PaCO₂            | 50 mm Hg          |
| HCO₃<sup>-</sup> | 26 mEq/L          |
1. Respiratory acidosis
2. Respiratory alkalosis
3. Metabolic acidosis
4. Metabolic alkalosis 

A nurse refers a female client with terminal cancer to a local hospice. What is the goal of this referral?
1. To help the client find an appropriate treatment option
2. To provide support for the client and family in coping with terminal illness
3. To ensure that the client gets counseling regarding health care costs
4. To teach the client and family about cancer and its treatment

When caring for a male client with a 3-cm stage I pressure ulcer on the coccyx, which of the following actions can the nurse institute independently?
1. Massaging the area with an astringent every 2 hours
2. Applying an antibiotic cream to the area three times per day
3. Using normal saline solution to clean the ulcer and applying a protective dressing as necessary
4. Using a povidone-iodine wash on the ulceration three times per day

A patient requires an elastic bandage for their ankle and calf. The nurse begins applying the bandage at the client's:
1. Knee
2. Ankle
3. Lower thigh
4. Foot

A 10-year-old child with Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus develops diabetic ketoacidosis and receives a continuous insulin infusion. Which condition represents the greatest risk to this child?
1. Hypernatremia
2. Hypokalemia
3. Hyperphosphatemia
4. Hypercalcemia

A nurse is administering nitroglycerin (Nitrostat) sublingually. The nurse warns the client that they may experience which condition immediately after administration?
1. Throbbing headache or dizziness
2. Nervousness or paresthesia
3. Drowsiness of blurred vision
4. Tinnitus or diplopia

A nurse hears the alarm go off on a telemetry monitor. The nurse quickly looks at the monitor and notes that the client is in ventricular tachycardia. The nurse rushes to the client's room and takes which action first?
1. Prepare for cardioversion
2. Prepare to defibrillate the client
3. In front of the client
4. Check the client's level of consciousness

A patient is preparing to ambulate. The best and safest position for the nurse in assisting the client is to stand:
1. On the unaffected side of the client
2. On the affected side of the client
3. In front of the client
4. Behind the client

A nurse is monitoring ongoing care given to a potential organ donor who has been diagnosed with brain death. The nurse determines that the standard of care had been maintained if which of the following data is observed?
1. Urine output of 45 mL/hr
2. Capillary refill of 5 seconds
3. Serum pH of 7.32
4. Blood pressure of 90/48 mm Hg

A urinalysis is ordered for a male client with an indwelling urinary catheter. The nurse avoids which of the following?
1. Wiping the port with an alcohol swab before inserting the syringe
2. Aspirating a sample from the port on the drainage bag
3. Clamping the tubing of the drainage bag
4. Obtaining the specimen from the urinary drainage bag

In the middle of giving a bed bath, the nurse receives a notification from the intercom that there is an emergency phone call. How does the nurse react?
1. Immediately walk out of the client's room and answer the phone call
2. Cover the client, place the call light within reach, and answer the phone call
3. Finish the bed bath before answering the phone call
4. Leave the client's door open so that the client can be monitored while the nurse answers the phone call

A culture and sensitivity test is ordered for a client with a productive cough. In obtaining a sputum sample, which of the following does the nurse plan to implement?
1. Ask the client to expectorate a small amount of sputum into the emesis basin
2. Ask the client to obtain the specimen after breakfast
3. Use a sterile plastic container for obtaining the specimen
4. Provide tissues for expectoration and obtaining the specimen

A male client is being taught how to ambulate with a walker. Which of the following, if demonstrated by the patient, indicates proper understanding of the health teaching?
1. Puts all the four points of the walker flat on the floor, puts weight on the hand pieces, and then walks into it
2. Puts weight on the hand pieces, moves the walker forward, and then walks into it
3. Puts weight on the hand pieces, slides the walker forward, and then walks into it
4. Walks into the walker, puts weight on the hand pieces, and then puts all four points of the walker flat on the floor

The nurse is documenting client care, when they realize that incorrect information has been documented. How does the nurse correct this error?
1. Erases the error and writes in the correct information
2. Uses correction fluid to cover up the incorrect information and writes in the correc tinformation
3. Draws one line to cross out the incorrect information then initials the change
4. Covers up the incorrect information completely using a black pen and writes in the correct information

A nurse is assisting with transferring a client from the operating room table to a stretcher. To provide safety for the client, the nurse:
1. Moves the client rapidly from the table to the stretcher
2. Uncovers the client completely before transferring the stretcher
3. Secures the client safety belts after transferring to the stretcher
4. Instructs the client to move self from the table to the stretcher

Nurse Myrna is providing instructions to a nursing assistant assigned to give a bed bath to a client who is on contact precautions. The nursing assistant is instructed to use which of the following protective items when giving a bed bath?
1. Gown and goggles
2. Gown and gloves
3. Gloves and shoe protectors
4. Gloves and goggles

A client with impaired mobility due to a stroke has right-sided arm and leg weakness. The nurse suggests to the client which of the following assistive devices to provide the best stability for ambulating?
1. Crutches
2. Single straight-legged cane
3. Quad Cane
4. Walker

A male client with a right pleural effusion noted on a chest x-ray is being prepared for thoracentesis. The client experiences severe dizziness when sitting upright. To provide a safe environment, the nurse assists the client to which position for the procedure?
1. Prone with the head turned towards the side supported by a pillow
2. Sims' position with the head of the bed flat
3. Right side-lying with the head of the bed elevated 45°
4. Left side-lying with the head of the bed elevated 45°

Which of the following criteria of a good instrument for data collection refers to the ability of the instrument to yield the same results upon its repeated administration?
1. Validity
2. Specificity
3. Sensitivity
4. Reliability

A researcher knows that they must protect the rights of human research subjects. Which of the following actions by the researcher ensures anonymity?
1. Keep the identities of the subjects secret
2. Obtain informed consent
3. Provide equal treatment to all the subjects of the study
4. Release findings only to the participants of the study

"A patient refusal to divulge information is a limitation because it is beyond the control of Tiffany". What type of research is appropriate for this study?
1. Descriptive-Correlational
2. Experiment
3. Quasi-experimental
4. Historical

The best tool for a nurse to gather data is:
1. Interview Schedule
2. Questionnaire
3. Use of Laboratory Data
4. Observation

A study is conducted only with manipulation of study variables, while the elements of control or randomization are not attendant. What type of research is found in this statement?
1. Field Study
2. Quasi-experiment
3. Solomon Four-group Design
4. Post-test Only Design

A researcher notes down ideas that were derived from the description of an investigation written by the person who conducted it. Which type of reference source refers to this?
1. Footnote
2. Bibliography
3. Primary Source
4. Endnotes

Nurses must remember that they are duty-bound to avoid doing any harm to the patient. This is because of the bioethical principle of:
1. Non-maleficence
2. Beneficence
3. Justice
4. Solidarity

Which doctrine is used for a nurse in-charge who causes an injury to a female patient after which the injury caused becomes proof of the act.
1. Force majeure
2. Respondeat superior
3. Res ipsa loquitor
4. Holdover doctrine

The Board of Nursing holds quasi-judicial power. An example of this power includes:
1. The Board can issue rules and regulations that will govern the practice of nursing
2. The Board can investigate violations of the nursing law and code of ethics
3. The Board can visit a school applying for a permit in collaboration with CHED
4. The Board prepares the board examinations

Which of the following is true when the license of a nurse is revoked?
1. No longer allowed to practice the profession indefinitely
2. Will never have a license reissued
3. May apply for reissuance of license based on conditions stipulated in R.A. 9173
4. Will remain unable to practice professional nursing

A research is being planned for the use of a new method of pain assessment. Which of the following is the second step in the conceptualizing phase of the research process?
1. Formulating the research hypothesis
2. Review of related literature
3. Formulating and delimiting the research problem
4. Design the theoretical and conceptual framework

The principal investigator notices that patients in a specialized research setting psychologically respond to the conditions of the study. The research knows that this is the phenomenon known as:
1. Cause and effect
2. Hawthorne Effect
3. Halo effect
4. Horns effect

A researcher decides to use judgment sampling for their research. Which of the following actions is under this type of sampling?
1. Plans to include whoever is there during his study
2. Determines the different nationalities of patients frequently admitted and decides to get representation samples from each
3. Assigns numbers for each of the patients, places these in a fishbowl, and draws 10 from it
4. Decides to get 20 samples from the admitted patients

The nursing theories who developed the transcultural nursing theory is:
1. Florence Nightingale
2. Madeleine Leininger
3. Albert Moore
4. Sr. Callista Roy

The sampling method that gives equal chance to all elements of the population to be picked is known as:
1. Random
2. Accidental
3. Quota
4. Judgment

A researcher plans to use a Likert scale in his study as they know it is well-suited for determining which of the following?
1. Degree of agreement or disagreement
2. Compliance to expected standards
3. Level of satisfaction
4. Degree of acceptance

Which of the following theorists conceptualized the four modes of adaptation?
1. Madeleine Leininger
2. Sr. Callista Roy
3. Florence Nightingale
4. Jean Watson

A manager handles and is responsible for all personnel reporting to her. This displays the principle of:
1. Span of control
2. Unity of command
3. Downward communication
4. Leader

Which bioethical principle mandates that informed consent is acquired before a surgery is done?
1. Beneficence
2. Autonomy
3. Veracity
4. Non-maleficence

A nurse is teaching a female client with peripheral vascular disease about foot care. Which restriction is included in the teaching plan?
1. Avoid wearing cotton socks.
2. Avoid using a nail clipper to cut toenails
3. Avoid wearing canvas shoes
4. Avoid using cornstarch on feet

A client is admitted with multiple pressure ulcers. When developing the client's diet plan, the nurse should include:
1. Fresh orange slices
2. Steamed brocolly
3. Ice cream
4. Ground beef patties

The nurse prepares to administer a cleansing enema. What is the most common client position used for this position?
1. Lithotomy
2. Supine
3. Prone
4. Sims' Left Lateral

A blood transfusion is ordered for a patient. The nurse, while preparing to administer the blood, takes which action first?
1. Arrange for typing and cross-matching of the client's blood
2. Compare the client's identification wristband with the tag on the unit of blood
3. Start an IV infusion of normal saline solution
4. Measure the client's vital signs

A 65-year-old male client requests for his medications to be given at 9:00 PM rather than 10:00 PM so that the may go to sleep earlier. The nurse must apply which type of intervention?
1. Independent
2. Dependent
3. Interdependent
4. Intradependent

A female client is to be discharged from an acute care facility after treatment for right leg thrombophlebitis. The nurse notes the client as pain-free and shows no redness or edema. The nurse's actions reflect which step of the nursing process?
1. Assessment
2. Diagnosis
3. Intervention
4. Evaluation

Nursing care planned for a female client includes removing elastic stockings once a day. The nurse is aware that this is done to:
1. To increase blood flow from the heart
2. To observe the lower extremities
3. To allow the leg muscles to stretch and relax
4. To permit veins in the legs to fill with blood

Which nursing intervention takes highest priority when caring for a newly admitted client who's receiving a blood transfusion?
1. Instructing the client to report any itching, swelling, or dyspnea
2. Informing the client that transfusion usually takes 1 1/2 to 2 hours
3. Documenting blood administration in the client care record
4. Assessing the client's vital signs when the transfusion ends

A male client complains of abdominal discomfort and nausea while receiving tube feedings. Which intervention by the nurse is appropriate?
1. Give the feedings at room temperature
2. Decrease the rate of feedings and the concentration of the formula
3. Place the client in a semi-Fowler's position while feeding
4. Change the feeding container every 12 hours

A nurse is preparing a powdered medication in a vial by reconstitution. After adding the solution to the powder, the nurse:
1. Do nothing
2. Invert the vial and let it stand for 3 to 5 minutes
3. Shake the vial vigorously
4. Roll the vial gently between the palms

Which intervention is used when administering oxygen via face mask to a client?
1. Secure the elastic band tightly around the client's head
2. Assist the client to a semi-Fowler's position if possible
3. Apply the face mask from the client's chin up over the nose
4. Loosen the connectors between the oxygen equipment and humidifier

The nurse finds a unit of packed red blood cells in place from the last shift, 6 hours ago. The nurse understands that the maximum transfusion time for a unit of packed red blood cells is:
1. 6 hours
2. 4 hours
3. 3 hours
4. 2 hours

A client is being monitored for effectiveness of drug therapy. The nurse obtains a blood sample to determine the trough drug level when?
1. 1 hour before administering the next dose
2. Immediately before administering the next dose
3. Immediately after administering the next dose
4. 30 minutes after administering the next dose

The nurse is aware that the main advantage of a floor stock system is:
1. The nurse can implement medication orders quickly.
2. The nurse receives input from the pharmacist.
3. The system minimizes transcription errors.
4. The system reinforces accurate calculations.

An abdominal assessment is being performed. The nurse notes which of the following as abnormal?
1. Dullness over the liver.
2. Bowel sounds occurring every 10 seconds.
3. Shifting dullness over the abdomen.
4. Vascular sounds heard over the renal arteries.
___
# Community Health Nursing and Maternal and Child Nursing
May arrives at the health care clinic and tells the nurse that her last menstrual period was 9 weeks ago. She also tells the nurse that a home pregnancy test was positive but she began to have mild cramps and is now having moderate vaginal bleeding. During the physical examination of the client, the nurse notes that May has a dilated cervix. The nurse determines that May is experiencing which type of abortion?
1. Inevitable
2. Incomplete
3. Threatened
4. Septic

Nurse Reese is reviewing the record of a pregnant client for her first prenatal visit. Which of the following data, if notes on the client's record, would alert the nurse that the client is at risk for a spontaneous abortion?
1. Age of 36 years
2. History of syphilis
3. History of genital herpes
4. History of diabetes mellitus

Nurse Hazel is preparing to care for a client who is newly admitted to the hospital with a possible diagnosis of ectopic pregnancy. The nurse develops a plan of care for the client and determines which of the following nursing actions as the priority?
1. Monitoring weight
2. Assessing for edema
3. Monitoring apical pulse
4. Monitoring temperature

Nurse Oliver is teaching a diabetic pregnant client about nutrition and insulin needs during pregnancy. The nurse determines that the client understands dietary and insulin needs if the client states that the second half of the pregnancy will require:
1. Decreased caloric intake
2. Increased caloric intake
3. Decreased insulin requirements
4. Increased insulin requirements

Nurse Michelle is assessing a 24-year-old client with a diagnosis of hydatidiform mole. She is aware that the following are associated with H-mole, except one:
1. Excessive fetal activity
2. Larger than normal uterus for gestational age
3. Vaginal bleeding
4. Elevated levels of human chorionic gonadotropin

A pregnant client is receiving magnesium sulfate for severe pregnancy-induced hypertension. The nurse finds which of the following clinical findings as a sign of toxicity?
1. Urinary output of 90 cc in 2 hours
2. Absent patellar reflexes
3. Rapid respiratory rate
4. Sudden rise in blood pressure

After vaginal examination of Janah who is in labor, the presenting part is documented as +2. The nurse interprets this as:
1. The presenting part is 2 centimeters above the plane of the ischial spines.
2. The biparietal diameter is at the level of the ischial spines.
3. The presenting part is 2 centimeters below the plane of the ischial spines.
4. The biparietal diameter is 2 centimeters above the ischial spines.

A pregnant client is receiving oxytocin (Pitocin) for induction of labor. A condition that warrants the nurse-in-charge to discontinue the infusion of Pitocin is:
1. Contractions every 1 1/2 minutes lasting 70 to 80 seconds
2. Maternal temperature of 101.2°F
3. Early decelerations in the fetal heart rate
4. Fetal heart rate is at a baseline of 140–160 BPM

Calcium gluconate is being administered to a client with pregnancy-induced hypertension. A nursing action that must be initiated as the plan of care throughout injection of the drug is:
1. Ventilator assistance
2. CVP readings
3. EKG tracings
4. Continuous CPR

A trial for vaginal delivery after an early cesareans, would likely to be given to a gravida who had:
1. First low transverse cesarean was for active herpes type 2 infections. Vaginal culture at 39 weeks pregnancy was positive.
2. First and second cesareans were for cephalopelvic disproportion.
3. First cesarean through a classic incision as a result of severe fetal distress.
4. First low transverse caesarean was for breech position.

Nurse Ryan is aware that the best initial approach when trying to take a crying toddler's temperature is:
1. Talk to the mother first, then the toddler.
2. Bring extra help so it can be done quickly.
3. Encourage the mother to hold the child.
4. Ignore the crying and screaming.

Baby Tina, a 3-month-old infant, just had a cleft lip and palate repair. What should the nurse do to prevent trauma to the operative site?
1. Avoid touching the suture line, even when cleaning.
2. Place the baby in prone position.
3. Give the baby a pacifier.
4. Place the infant's arms in soft elbow restraints. #12
___
# PNLE I: Foundations of Nursing
Which element in the circular chain of infection can be eliminated by preserving skin integrity?
1. Host
2. Reservoir
3. Mode of transmission
4. Portal of entry

Which of the following will most likely result in a break in sterile technique for respiratory isolation?
1. Opening the patient's window to the outside environment
2. Turning on the patient's room ventilatory
3. Opening the door of the patient's room leading to the hospital corridor
4. Failing to wear gloves when administering a bed bath

Which of the following patients is at greater risk for contracting an infection?
1. A patient with leukopenia
2. A patient receiving broad-spectrum antibiotics
3. A postoperative patient who has undergone orthopedic surgery
4. A newly diagnosed diabetic patient

Effective handwashing requires the use of:
1. Soap or detergent to promote emulsification
2. Hot water to destroy bacteria
3. A disinfectant to increase surface tension
4. All of the above

After a routine patient contact, handwashing should last at least:
1. 30 seconds
2. 1 minute
3. 2 minutes
4. 3 minutes

Which of the following procedures always requires surgical asepsis?
1. Vaginal instillation of conjugated estrogen
2. Urinary catheterization
3. Nasogastric tube insertion
4. Colostomy irrigation

Sterile technique is used whenever:
1. Strict isolation is required
2. Terminal disinfection is performed
3. Invasive procedures are performed
4. Protective isolation is necessary

Which of the following constitutes a break in sterile technique while preparing a sterile field for a dressing change?
1. Using sterile forceps, rather than sterile gloves, to handle a sterile item
2. Touching the outside wrapper of sterilized material without sterile gloves
3. Placing a sterile object on the edge of the sterile field
4. Pouring out a small amount of solution before pouring the rest of the solution into a sterile container

A natural body defense that plays an active role in preventing infection is:
1. Yawning
2. Body hair
3. Hiccupping
4. Rapid eye movements

All of the following statements are true about donning sterile gloves except:
1. The first glove should be picked up by grasping the inside of the cuff
2. The second glove should be picked up by inserting the gloved finger under the sterile cuff and pulling the glove over the wrist
3. The gloves should be adjusted by sliding the gloved fingers under the sterile cuff and pulling the glove over the wrist
4. The inside of the glove is considered sterile

When removing a contaminated gown, the nurse should be careful that the first thing he/she touches is the:
1. Waist tie and neck tie at the back of the gown
2. Waist tie in front of the gown
3. Cuffs of the gown
4. Inside of the gown

Which of the following nursing interventions is considered the most effective form of universal precautions?
1. Cap all used needles before removing them from their syringes
2. Discard all used uncapped needles and syringes in an impenetrable protective container
3. Wear gloves when administering IM injections
4. Follow enteric precautions

All of the following measures are recommended to prevent pressure ulcers except:
1. Massaging the reddened area with lotion
2. Using a water or air mattress
3. Adhering to a schedule for positioning and turning
4. Providing meticulous skin care

Which of the following blood tests should be performed before a blood transfusion?
1. Prothrombin time and coagulation time
2. Blood typing and cross-matching
3. Bleeding and clotting time
4. Complete blood count (CBC) and electrolyte levels

The primary purpose of a platelet count is to evaluate the:
1. Potential for clot formation
2. Potential for bleeding
3. Presence of an antigen-antibody response
4. Presence of cardiac enzymes

Which of the following while blood cells (WBC) counts clearly indicates leukocytosis?
1. 4,500/mm³
2. 7,000/mm³
3. 10,000/mm³
4. 25,500/mm³

After 5 days of diuretic therapy with 20 mg of furosemide (Lasix) daily, a patient begins to exhibit fatigue, muscle cramping, and muscle weakness. These symptoms probably indicate that the patient is experiencing:
1. Hypokalemia
2. Hyperkalemia
3. Anorexia
4. Dysphagia

Which of the following statements about a chest x-ray is false?
1. There are no contraindications for this test
2. Before the procedure, the patient should remove all jewelry, metallic object, and buttons about the waist
3. A signed consent is not required
4. Eating, drinking, and medications are allowed before this test

The most appropriate time for the nurse to obtain a sputum specimen for culture is:
1. Early in the morning
2. After the patient eats a light breakfast
3. After aerosol therapy
4. After chest physiotherapy

A patient with no known allergies is to receive penicillin every 6 hours. When administering the medication, the nurse observes a fine rash on the patient's skin. The most appropriate nursing action would be to:
1. Withhold the medication and notify the physician
2. Administer the medication and notify the physician
3. Administer the medication with an antihistamine
4. Apply corn starch soaks to the rash

All of the following nursing interventions are correct when using the Z-track method of drug injection except:
1. Prepare the injection site with alcohol
2. use a needle that's at least 1 inch long
3. Aspirate for blood before injection
4. Rub the site vigorously after the injection to promote absorption

The correct method for determining the vastus lateralis site for an intramuscular injection is to:
1. Locate the upper aspect of the upper outer quadrant of the buttock about 5 to 8 cm below the iliac crest
2. Palpate the lower edge of the acromion process and the midpoint lateral aspect of the arm
3. Palpate a 1" circular area anterior to the umbilicus
4. Divide the area between the greater femoral trochanter and the lateral femoral condyle into third, and select the middle third on the anterior of the thigh

The mid-deltoid injection site is seldom used for IM because it:
1. Can only accommodate 1 mL or less of medication
2. Bruises too easily
3. Can be used only when the patient is lying down
4. Does not readily receive parenteral medication

The appropriate needle size for insulin injection is:
1. 18G, 1 1/2"
2. 22G, 1"
3. 22G, 1 1/2"
4. 25G, 5/8"

The appropriate needle gauge for intradermal injection is:
1. 20G
2. 22G
3. 25G
4. 26G

Parenteral penicillin can be administered as an:
1. IM injection or an IV solution
2. IV or an ID injection
3. ID or an SC injection
4. IM or an SC injection

The physician orders 10 grains of aspirin for a patient. The equivalent dose in milligrams is:
1. 0.6 mg
2. 10 mg
3. 60 mg
4. 600 mg

The physician orders an IV solution of D5W at 100 mL/hr. What would the flow rate be if the drop factor is 15 gtts/mL?
1. 5 gtts/min
2. 13 gtts/min
3. 25 gtts/min
4. 50 gtts/min

Which of the following is a sign of a hemolytic reaction to blood transfusion?
1. Hemoglobinuria
2. Chest pain
3. Urticaria
4. Distended neck veins

Which of the following conditions may require fluid resuscitation?
1. Fever
2. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
3. Renal Failure
4. Dehydration

All of the following are common signs and symptoms of phlebitis, except:
1. Pain or discomfort at the IV insertion site
2. Edema and warmth at the IV insertion site
3. A red streak exiting the IV insertion site
4. Frank bleeding at the insertion site

The best way of determining whether a patient has learned to instill ear medication properly is for the nurse to:
1. Ask the patient if they have used ear drops before
2. Have the patient repeat the nurse's instructions using their own words
3. Demonstrate the procedure to the patient and encourage them to ask questions
4. Ask the patient to demonstrate the procedure

Which of the following types of medications can be administered via gastrotomy tube?
1. Any oral medications
2. Capsules whose contents are dissolved in water
3. Enteric-coated tablets that are thoroughly dissolved in water
4. Most tablets designed for oral use, except for extended-duration compounds

A patient who develops hives after receiving an antibiotic is exhibiting drug:
1. Tolerance
2. Idiosyncrasy
3. Synergism
4. Allergy

A patient has returned to his room after femoral arteriography. All of the following are appropriate nursing interventions except:
1. Assess the femoral, popliteal, and pedal pulses every 15 minutes for 2 hours.
2. Check the pressure dressing for sanguineous drainage
3. Assess vital signs every 15 minutes for 2 hours
4. Order a hemoglobin and hematocrit count 1 hour after the arteriography

The nurse explains to a patient that a cough:
1. Is a protective response to clear the respiratory tract of irritants
2. Is primarily a voluntary action
3. Is induced by the administration of an antitussive drug
4. Can be inhibited by splinting the abdomen

An infection patient has chills and begins shivering. The best nursing intervention is to:
1. Apply iced alcohol sponges
2. Provide increased cool liquids
3. Provide additional bedclothes
4. Provide increased ventilation

A clinical nurse specialist is a nurse who has:
1. Been certified by the National League of Nursing
2. Received credentials from the Philippine Nurses Association
3. Graduated from an associate degree program and is a registered professional nurse
4. Completed a master's degree in the prescribed clinical area and is a registered professional nurse

The purpose of increasing urine acidity through dietary means is to:
1. Decrease burning sensations
2. Change the urine's color
3. Change the urine's concentration
4. Inhibit the growth of microorganisms

Clay-colored stools indicate:
1. Upper GI bleeding
2. Impending constipation
3. An effect of medication
4. Bile obstruction

In which step of the nursing process would the nurse ask a patient if the medication she administered relieved his pain?
1. Assessment
2. Analysis
3. Planning
4. Evaluation

All of the following are good sources of vitamin A except:
1. White potatoes
2. Carrots
3. Apricots
4. Egg yolks

Which of the following is a primary nursing intervention necessary for all patients with a Foley catheter in place?
1. Maintain the drainage tubing and collecting bag level with the patient's bladder
2. Irrigate the patient with 1% Neosporin solution three times daily
3. Clamp the catheter 1 hour every 4 hours to maintain the bladder's elasticity
4. Maintain the drainage tubing and collection bag below bladder level to facilitate drainage by gravity

The ELISA test is used to:
1. Screen blood donors for antibodies to human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
2. Test blood to be used for transfusion with HIV antibodies
3. Aid in diagnosing a patient with AIDS
4. All of the above

The two blood vessels commonly used for TPN infusion are:
1. The subclavian and jugular veins
2. The brachial and subclavian veins
3. The femoral and subclavian veins
4. The brachial and femoral veins

Effective skin disinfection before a surgical procedure includes which of the following methods?
1. Shaving the site on the day before the surgery
2. Applying a topical antiseptic to the skin on the even before surgery
3. Having the patient take a tub bath on the morning of the surgery
4. Having the patient shower with an antiseptic soap on the evening before and the morning of surgery

When transferring a patient from a bed to a chair, the nurse should use which muscles to avoid back injury?
1. Abdominal muscles
2. Back muscles
3. Leg muscles
4. Upper arm muscles

Thrombophlebitis typically develops in patients with which of the following conditions?
1. Increased partial thrombophlebitis time
2. Acute pulsus paradoxus
3. An impaired or traumatized blood vessel wall
4. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease

In a recumbent, immobilized patient, lung ventilation can become altered, leading to respiratory complications such as:
1. Respiratory acidosis, atelectasis, and hypostatic pneumonia
2. Apneustic breathing, atypical pneumonia, and respiratory alkalosis
3. Cheyne-Stokes respirations and spontaneous pneumothorax
4. Kussmaul's respirations and hypoventilation

Immobility impairs bladder elimination resulting in complications of:
1. Increased urine acidity and relaxation of the perineal muscles, causing incontinence
2. Urine retention, bladder distention, and infection
3. Diuresis, natriuresis, and decreased urine specific gravity
4. Decreased calcium and phosphate levels in the urine
___
# PNLE II: Maternal and Child Health
___
# PNLE III: Medical-Surgical Nursing
Marco who was diagnosed with a brain tumor is scheduled for craniotomy. In preventing the development of cerebral edema after surgery, the nurse should expect the use of:
1. Diuretics
2. Antihypertensives
3. Steroids
4. Anticonvulsants

Halfway through the administration of blood, the female client complains of lumbar pain. After stopping the infusion, the nurse then:
1. Increases the flow of normal saline
2. Assesses the pain further
3. Notifies the blood bank
4. Obtains vital signs

The positive diagnosis for an HIV infection is made based on which of the following?
1. A history of high-risk sexual behaviors
2. A positive ELISA and western blot tests
3. Identification of an associated opportunistic infection
4. Evidence of extreme weight loss and a high fever

The nurse is aware that a client who has been diagnosed with chronic renal failure recognizes an adequate amount of high-biologic-value protein when the food the client selected from the menu was:
1. Raw carrots
2. Apple juice
3. Whole wheal bread
4. Cottage cheese

A patient diagnosed with uremic syndrome has the potential to develop complications. Which among the following compilations should the nurse anticipate?
1. Flapping hand tremors
2. An elevated hematocrit level
3. Hypotension
4. Hypokalemia

A client is admitted to the hospital with benign prostatic hyperplasia. The most relevant assessment that the nurse conducts is:
1. Flank pain radiating to the groin
2. Distention of the lower abdomen
3. Perineal edema
4. Urethral discharge

A client has had the insertion of a penile implant. 24 hours after the surgery, the client's scrotum appeared edematous and painful. The nurse should:
1. Assist the client with a Sitz bath
2. Apply war soaks in the scrotum
3. Elevate the scrotum using a soft support
4. Prepare for a possible incision and drainage

The nurse receives emergency laboratory results for a client with chest pain and immediately informs the physician. An increased myoglobin level suggests which of the following?
1. Liver disease
2. Myocardial damage
3. Hypertension
4. Cancer

A nurse expects a client with mitral stenosis to demonstrate congestion in the:
1. Right atrium
2. Superior vena cava
3. Aorta
4. Pulmonary circulation

The priority nursing diagnosis for a client diagnosed with essential hypertension is:
1. Ineffective health maintenance
2. Impaired skin integrity
3. Deficient fluid volume
4. Pain

A nurse teaches a client with angina about common expected side effects of nitroglycerin includes:
1. High blood pressure
2. Stomach cramps
3. Headache
4. Shortness of breath

Of the following lipid abnormalities, which are risk factors for the development of atherosclerosis and peripheral vascular disease?
1. High levels of low density lipid (LDL) cholesterol
2. High levels of high density lipid (HDL) cholesterol
3. Low concentration of triglycerides
4. Low levels of low density lipid (LDL) cholesterol

Which of the following represents a significant risk immediately after surgery for the repair of an aortic aneurysm?
1. Potential wound infection
2. Potential ineffective coping
3. Potential electrolyte balance
4. Potential alteration in renal perfusion

A client is instructed to eat which of the following foods to obtain the best supply of Vitamin B₁₂?
1. Dairy products
2. Vegetables
3. Grains
4. Broccoli

The nurse monitors for physiologic changes in a client with aplastic anemia. Which of the following does the nurse assess?
1. Bowel function
2. Peripheral sensation
3. Bleeding tendencies
4. Intake and output

Lydia is scheduled for elective splenectomy. Before the client goes to surgery, the final assessment done by the nurse in charge involves:
1. Signed consent
2. Vital signs
3. Name band
4. Empty bladder

What is the peak age range in acquiring acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL)?
1. 4 to 12 years
2. 20 to 30 years
3. 40 to 50 years
4. 60 to 70 years

Marie with acute lymphocytic leukemia suffers from nausea and headache. These clinical manifestations may indicate all of the following except:
1. Effects of radiation
2. Chemotherapy side effects
3. Meningeal irritation
4. Gastric distention

A client with disseminated intravascular coagulation will have which contraindication?
1. Administering heparin
2. Administering coumadin
3. Treating the underlying cause
4. Replacing depleted blood products

Which of the following findings is the best indication that fluid replacement for the client with hypovolemic shock is adequate?
1. Urine output greater than 30 mL/hr
2. Respiratory rate of 21 breaths/minute
3. Diastolic blood pressure greater than 90 mm Hg
4. Systolic blood pressure greater than 110 mm Hg

Which of the following signs and symptoms would the nurse describe as an early manifestation of laryngeal cancer?
1. Stomatitis
2. Airway obstruction
3. Hoarseness
4. Dysphagia

A client with myasthenia gravis is receiving immunosuppressive therapy. The nurse understands that this therapy is effective because it:
1. Promotes the removal of antibodies that impair the transmission of impulses
2. Stimulates the production of acetylcholine at the neuromuscular junction
3. Decreases the production of autoantibodies that attack the acetylcholine receptors
4. Inhibits the breakdown of acetylcholine at the neuromuscular junction

A female client is receiving IV mannitol. An assessment specific to safe administration of this drug is:
1. Vital signs every four hours
2. Daily weighing
3. Urine output hourly
4. Level of consciousness every four hours

A 20-year-old college students with diabetes mellitus requests additional information about the advantages of using a pen-like insulin delivery device. The nurse explains that the advantages of these devices over syringes includes:
1. Accurate dose delivery
2. Shorter injection time
3. Lower cost with reusable insulin cartridges
4. Use of a smaller gauge needle

A male client's left tibia is fractured in an automobile accident and is fitted with a cast. To assess the patient's neurovascular status, the nurse in charge monitors the client for:
1. Swelling of the left thigh
2. Increased skin temperature of the efoot
3. Prolonged reperfusion of the toes after blanching
4. Increased blood pressure

After a long leg cast is removed, the male client should:
1. Cleanse the leg by scrubbing with a brisk motion
2. Put the leg through a full range of motion twice a day
3. Report any discomfort or stiffness to the physician
4. Elevate the leg when sitting for long periods of time

While performing a physical assessment of a male client with gout of the great toe, the nurse assesses for additional tophi on the:
1. Buttocks
2. Ears
3. Face
4. Abdomen

The nurse recognizes a correct demonstration of crutch walking with a tripod gait when the client places weight on the:
1. Palms of the hands and axillary regions
2. Palms of the hand
3. Axillary regions
4. Feet, which are set apart

A client with rheumatoid arthritis states, "the only time I am without pain is when I lie in bed perfectly still." During the convalescent stage, the nurse in charge should encourage:
1. Active joint flexion and extension
2. Continued immobility until pain subsides
3. Range of motion exercises twice a day
4. Flexion exercises three times daily

The nurse should observe which of the following for a male client who has undergone spinal surgery?
1. Bowel movement and voiding patterns
2. Log-rolling the client to a prone position
3. Assessing the client's feet for sensation and circulation
4. Encouraging the client to drink plenty of fluids

A client with acute renal failure moves into the diuretic phase after one week of therapy. During this phase, the client has a risk for:
1. Hypovolemia
2. Renal failure
3. Metabolic acidosis
4. Hyperkalemia

A specimen of clear nasal drainage is obtained from a client with a head injury. Which of the following tests would determine whether the drainage is mucus or cerebrospinal fluid?
1. Protein
2. Specific gravity
3. glucose
4. Microorganisms

A 22-year-old client suffered from a tonic-clonic seizure for the first time. Upon awakening the client, he asks "Why did that happen to me?" The nurse states that the primary cause of tonic-clonic seizures in adults older than 20 years old is:
1. Electrolyte imbalance
2. Head trauma
3. Epilepsy
4. Congenital defect

What is the priority nursing assessment in the first 24 hours after admission of a client who had a thrombotic cardiovascular accident?
1. Pupil size and papillary response
2. Cholesterol level
3. Echocardiogram
4. Bowel sounds

A client with multiple sclerosis is being prepared for discharge from the hospital. Which of the following instructions given by the nurse is most appropriate?
1. Practice using the mechanical aids that you will need when future disabilities arise.
2. Follow good health habits to change the course of the disease.
3. Keep active, use stress reduction strategies, and avoid fatigue.
4. You will need to accept the necessity for a quiet and inactive lifestyle.

The nurse is aware of the early indicator of hypoxia in an unconscious client is:
1. Cyanosis
2. Increased respirations
3. Hypertension
4. Restlessness

A client is in spinal shock. The nurse expects the patient's bladder function to be:
1. Normal
2. Atonic
3. Spastic
4. Uncontrolled

Which of the following stages is a carcinogen irreversible?
1. Progression
2. Initiation
3. Regression
4. Promotion

Among the following components of a thorough pain assessment, which is the most significant?
1. Effect
2. Cause
3. Precipitating Factors
4. Intensity

A 65-year-old female is experiencing a flare-up of pruritus. Which of the client's actions could have caused this exacerbation?
1. Sleeping in a cool, humidified environment
2. Daily baths with fragrant soap
3. Using clothes made from 100% cotton
4. Increasing fluid intake

In which patient is atropine sulfate (Atropine) not contraindicated in?
1. A hypertensive patient
2. A patient with bowel obstruction
3. A patient with glaucoma
4. A client with a urinary tract infection

Among the following clients, which one has high risk for potential hazards from surgery?
1. 67-year-old client
2. 49-year-old client
3. 33-year-old client
4. 13-year-old client

The vital signs of a client who has undergone an epidural anesthesia was taken. Which should the nurse assess next?
1. Headache
2. Bladder distention
3. Dizziness
4. Ability to move the legs

All of the following drugs may be used in the attempt to control the symptoms of Meniere's disease, except for:
1. Antiemetics
2. Diuretics
3. Antihistamines
4. Glucocorticoids

Which of the following complications are associated with the use of a tracheostomy tube?
1. Increased cardiac output
2. Acute respiratory distress syndrome
3. Increased blood pressure
4. Damage to laryngeal nerves

The nurse should recognize that a fluid shift in a client with burn injury results from an increase in the:
1. Total volume of circulating whole blood
2. Total volume of intravascular plasma
3. Permeability of capillary walls
4. Permeability of kidney tubules

The nurse informs an 83-year-old woman with several ecchymosed areas on her right arm that these are most likely caused by:
1. Increased capillary fragility and permeability
2. Increased blood supply to the skin
3. Self-inflicted injury
4. Elder abuse

A nurse should be aware that the early adaptation of a client with renal carcinoma is:
1. Nausea and vomiting
2. Flank pain
3. Weight gain
4. Intermitted hematuria

A male client with tuberculosis asks the nurse how long a medication regime must be continued. The nurse accurately answers:
1. 1 to 3 weeks
2. 6 to 12 months
3. 3 to 5 months
4. 3 years and more

A client has undergone laryngectomy. The immediate nursing priority would be to:
1. Keep the trachea free of secretions
2. Monitor for signs of infection
3. Provide emotional support
4. Promote a means of communication
___
# PNLE IV: Psychiatric Nursing
Marco approached the nurse asking for advice on how to deal with an alcohol addiction. The nurse informs the client that the only effective treatment for alcoholism is:
1. Psychotherapy
2. Alcoholics Anonymous
3. Total Abstinence
4. Aversion Therapy

A male client is experiencing false sensory perceptions with no basis in reality. These perceptions are known as:
1. Hallucinations
2. Delusions
3. Loose associations
4. Neologisms

A nurse is caring for a female client with suicidal tendencies. When accompanying the client to the restroom, the nurse should:
1. Give her privacy
2. Allow her to urinate
3. Open the window and allow her to get some air
4. Observe her

A nurse is developing a plan of care for a female client with anorexia nervosa. Which action should the nurse include in the plan?
1. Provide privacy during meals
2. Set-up a strict eating plan for the client
3. Encourage the client to exercise to reduce anxiety
4. Restrict client visitation by the family

A client is experiencing an anxiety attack. The most appropriate nursing intervention should include:
1. Turning on the television
2. Leaving the client alone
3. Staying with the client and speaking in short sentences
4. Asking the client to play with other clients

A female client is admitted with delusions of grandeur. This diagnosis reflects a belief that an individual is:
1. Being killed
2. Highly famous or important
3. Responsible for all evil in the world
4. Connected to persons unrelated to oneself

A 20-year-old client was diagnosed with dependent personality disorder shows which ineffective coping behaviors?
1. Recurrent self-destructive behavior
2. Avoiding relationships
3. Showing interest in solitary activities
4. Inability to make choices and decisions without advice

A male client is diagnosed with schizotypal personality disorder. Which signs would this client exhibit during social situations?
1. Paranoid thoughts
2. Emotional affect
3. Independence
4. Aggressive behavior

A nurse is caring for a client with bulimia. The most appropriate initial goal for a client diagnosed with bulimia is:
1. Encourage the client to avoid foods
2. Identify anxiety-causing situations
3. Eat only three meals a day
4. Avoid shopping for plenty of groceries

A nurse is caring for a 41-year-old female client. Which behavior highlights an appropriate cognitive development for an adult?
1. Generates new levels of awareness
2. Assumes responsibility for her actions
3. Has maximum ability to solve problems and learn new skills
4. Her perception are based on reality

A neuromuscular blocking agent is administered to a client before ECT. The nurse should observe the client for:
1. Respiratory difficulties
2. Nausea and vomiting
3. Dizziness
4. Seizures

A 75-year-old client is admitted to the hospital with the diagnosis of dementia of the Alzheimer's type and depression. Which of the following behaviors is not related to depression?
1. Apathy to the environment
2. "I don't know" answers to questions
3. Shallow or labile affect
4. Neglect of personal hygiene

The priority nursing intervention for a newly admitted client with bulimia nervosa would be to:
1. Teach the client to measure intake and output
2. Involve the client in planning daily meals
3. Observe the client during meals
4. Monitor the client continuously

A major health complication associated with intractable anorexia nervosa would be?
1. Cardiac dysrhythmias resulting to cardiac arrest
2. Glucose intolerance resulting in protracted hypoglycemia
3. Endocrine imbalance causing cold amenorrhea
4. Decreased metabolism causing cold intolerance

The nurse understands that agitation can be minimized in a disturbed client by:
1. Increased stimulation
2. Limiting unnecessary interactions
3. Increased appropriate sensory perceptions
4. Ensuring constant client and staff contact

A 39-year-old mother with obsessive-compulsive disorder has become immobilized by her elaborate handwashing and walking rituals. The nurse recognizes that the basis of this disorder is often:
1. Problems with being too conscientious
2. Problems with anger and remorse
3. Feelings of guilt and inadequacy
4. Feelings of unworthiness and hopelessness

A client is complaining to other clients about not being allowed by staff to keep food in his room. Which of the following interventions would be most appropriate?
1. Allowing a snack to be kept in the client's room
2. Reprimanding the client
3. Ignoring the client's behavior
4. Setting limits on the behavior

A client with borderline personality disorder is being discharge soon, but threatened to "do something" to herself if discharged. Which of the following actions would be most important?
1. Ask a family member to stay with the client temporarily
2. Discuss the meaning of the client's statement with her
3. Request an immediate extension for the client
4. Ignore the client's statements because these are signs of manipulation

A client with antisocial personality disorder belches loudly. A staff member asks them, "Do you know why people find you repulsive?" This statement would elicit which of the following client reactions?
1. Defensiveness
2. Embarrassment
3. Shame
4. Remorsefulness

Which of the following approaches would be most appropriate to use with a client suffering from narcissistic personality disorder when discrepancies exist between what the client states and what actually exists?
1. Rationalization
2. Supportive confrontation
3. Limit setting
4. Consistency

A client experiencing alcohol withdrawal exhibits tremors, diaphoresis, and hyperactivity. Their blood pressure is 190/87 mm Hg and their pulse is 92 BPM. Which of the following medications would the nurse expect to administer?
1. Naloxone (Narcan)
2. Benztropine (Cogentin)
3. Lorazepam (Ativan)
4. Haloperidol (Haldol)

Which of the following foods would the nurse eliminate from the diet of a client in alcohol withdrawal?
1. Milk
2. Orange juice
3. Soda
4. Regular coffee

Which of the following would the nurse expect to assess for a client who is exhibiting signs of heroin withdrawal?
1. Yawning and diaphoresis
2. Restlessness and irritability
3. Constipation and steatorrhea
4. Vomiting and diarrhea

To establish an open and trusting relationship with a female client with severe anxiety, the nurse in charge should:
1. Encourage the staff to have frequent interactions with the client
2. Share activities with the client
3. Give the client feedback about their behavior
4. Respect the client's need for personal space

A nurse must recognize that the focus of milieu therapy is to:
1. Manipulate the environment to bring about positive changes in behavior
2. Allow the client's freedom to determine whether or not they will be involved in activities
3. Roleplay life events to meet individual needs
4. Use natural remedies rather than drugs to control behavior

A child with a diagnosis of reactive attachment disorder is expected to:
1. Have more positive relations with the father than the mother
2. Cling to the mother and cry upon separation
3. Be able to develop only superficial relationships with others
4. Have been physically abused

When teaching parents about childhood depression, the nurse states:
1. It may manifest "acting-out" behavior
2. Does not respond to conventional treatment
3. Is short in duration and resolves easily
4. Looks almost identical to adult depression

The nurse is aware that language development in autistic children resembles:
1. Scanning speech
2. Speech lag
3. Stuttering
4. Echolalia

A 60-year-old client who lives alone tells the nurse at the community health center: "I really don't need anyone to talk to. The TV is my best friend." The nurse recognizes that the client is using the defense mechanism known as:
1. Displacement
2. Projection
3. Sublimation
4. Denial

When working with a male client suffering phobia about black cats, the nurse should anticipate that a problem for this client would be?
1. Anxiety when discussing the phobia
2. Anger toward the feared object
3. Denying that the phobia exists
4. Distortion of reality when completing daily routines

A client is pacing the floor and appears extremely anxious. The duty nurse approaches in an attempt to alleviate their anxiety. The most therapeutic question by the nurse would be:
1. Would you like to watch TV?
2. Would you like me to talk to you?
3. Are you feeling upset now?
4. Ignore the client

The nurse is aware that the symptoms that distinguish posttraumatic stress disorder from other anxiety disorders would be:
1. Avoidance of the situation and certain activities that resemble main stressors
2. Depression and a blunted affect when discussing the traumatic situation
3. Lack of interest in the family and others
4. Re-experiencing the trauma in dreams or flashbacks

The nurse communicates with a male client with substance-induced persisting dementia. The client cannot remember facts and fills in the gaps with imaginary information. The nurse identifies this phenomenon as:
1. Flight of Ideas
2. Associative Looseness
3. Confabulation
4. Concretism

The nurse is aware that the signs and symptoms most specific for diagnosis with anorexia are?
1. Excessive weight loss, amenorrhea, and abdominal distention
2. Slow pulse, 10% weight loss, alopecia
3. Compulsive behavior, excessive fears, nausea
4. Excessive activity, memory lapses, increased pulse

Which characteristic that would suggest to the nurse that an adolescent may have bulimia?
1. Frequent regurgitation and re-swallowing of food
2. Previous history of gastritis
3. Badly stained teeth
4. Positive body image

The nurse is aware that extremely depressed clients seem to do best in settings where they have:
1. Multiple stimuli
2. Routine activities
3. Minimal decision making
4. Varied activities

To further assess a client's suicide potential, the nurse should be especially alert to the client's expressions of:
1. Frustration and fear of death
2. Anger and resentment
3. Anxiety and loneliness
4. Helplessness and hopelessness

A nursing care plan for a male client with bipolar I disorder should include:
1. Providing a structured environment
2. Designing activities that will require the client to maintain contact with reality
3. Engaging the client in conversing about current affairs
4. Using touch to provide assurance

When planning care for a female client using ritualistic behaviors, the nurse must recognize that rituals:
1. Help the client focus on the inability to deal with reality
2. Help the client control anxiety
3. Is under conscious control of the client
4. Is used by the client primarily for secondary gains

A 32-year-old male graduate student who has become increasingly withdrawn and neglectful of his work and personal hygiene is brought to the psychiatric hospital by his parents. After a detailed assessment, a diagnosis of schizophrenia is made. It is unlikely that the client will demonstrate:
1. Low self esteem
2. Concrete thinking
3. Effective self boundaries
4. Weak ego

A 23-year-old client who has been admitted with a diagnosis of schizophrenia states, "Yes, It's March. March is a little woman. That's literal you know." The nurse understands that these statements illustrate:
1. Neologisms
2. Echolalia
3. Flight of ideas
4. Loosening of association

A long-term goal for a paranoid male client who has unjustifiably accused his wife of having many extramarital affairs would be to help the client develop:
1. Insight into his behavior
2. Better self-control
3. Feeling of self-worth
4. Faith in his wife

A male client experiencing disordered thinking about food being poisoned is admitted to the mental health unit. The nurse uses which communication technique to encourage the client to eat dinner?
1. Focusing on self-disclosure of own food preference
2. Using open-ended questions and silence
3. Offering opinion about the need to eat
4. Verbalizing reasons that the client may not choose to eat

The nurse is assigned to care for a client diagnosed with catatonic stupor. When the nurse enters the client's room, the client is found lying on the bed with the body pulled into a fetal position. What is the nurse's most appropriate action?
1. Ask the client direct questions to encourage talking
2. Rake the client into the dayroom to be with other clients
3. Sit beside the client in silence and occasionally ask open-ended questions
4. Leave the client alone and continue with providing care to the other clients

The nurse is caring for a client with delirium and says, "Look at the spiders on the wall!" How should the nurse respond to the client?
1. "You're having a hallucination. There are no spiders in this room."
2. "I see the spiders, but they're not going to hurt you."
3. "Would you like me to kill the spiders?"
4. "I know you're scared, but I do not see spiders on the wall."

The nurse is providing information to a community group about violence in the family. Which statement by a group member would indicate a need to provide additional information?
1. "Abuse occurs more in low-income families."
2. "Abusers are often jealous or self-centered."
3. "Abusers use fear and intimidation."
4. "Abusers usually have poor self-esteem."

During electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), the client receives oxygen by mask via positive pressure ventilation. The nurse assisting with this procedure knows that positive pressure ventilation is necessary because?
1. Anesthesia is administered during the procedure
2. Decrease oxygen to the brain increases confusion and disorientation
3. Grand mal seizure activity depresses respirations
4. Muscle relaxants given to prevent injury during seizure activity depresses respirations

When planning the discharge of a client with chronic anxiety, the nurse evaluates achievement of the discharge maintenance goals. Which goal would be most appropriate having been included in the plan of care requiring evaluation?
1. The client eliminates all anxiety from daily situations
2. The client ignores feelings of anxiety
3. The client identifies anxiety-producing situations
4. The client maintains contact with a crisis counselor

The nurse is caring for a client with depression who has not responded to antidepressant medication. The nurse anticipates which treatment procedure?
1. Neuroleptic medication
2. Short-term seclusion
3. Psychosurgery
4. Electroconvulsive therapy

A client is admitted to the emergency room with drug-induced anxiety related to over ingestion of prescribed antipsychotic medication. The most important piece of information the nurse in charge should obtain initially is the:
1. Length of time on the medication
2. Name of the ingested medication and amount ingested
3. Reason for the suicide attempt
4. Name of the nearest relative and their contact information

