Injustice, Liberalism, and Martyrdom. The roots of Rizal's burning passion to right the wrongs of the Spanish rule.
# Rizal's Mother
Soon after the Christmas of 1871, Rizal's mother, Teodora ("*Dona Lolay*") was imprisoned for allegedly plotting to poison her brother's (Jose Alberto) wife (Teodora Fermosa), as she was cheating and plotting against her husband. Spaniard officials who had grudges against *Don Kikoy*, Rizal's father, used it as an opportunity to enact revenge. They tied Lolay to a wagon and had her walk the distance from Calamba to Santa Cruz, a ~50 kilometer march. There, she would become imprisoned for two and a half years before her eventual release.
- Mayor Antonino Vivencio del Rosario even re-opened her case to the *Royal Audencia*. Her husband had to hire two excellent lawyers from Manila for her eventual release.
- Lolay would also become sick while in captivity. Her husband spent many resources to continue to be able to visit her. Her children could visit, but often were discouraged by their father to avoid the emotional burden of seeing their mother imprisoned.
___
# The Spanish Revolution
Coined as the "*Revolucion de Disgusto*"; "Revolution of Disgust", **Marshals Francisco Serrano and Juan Prim** staged a revolution against Queen Isabel II, and eventually overtook her position. Serrano became the Marshal Regent of Spain and established a republican form of government, ending the absolute monarchy in Spain. This change would also take hold on their colonies, albeit to a lesser degree.
- *Governador General* Carlos Ma. dela Torre was assigned to the Philippines, where he reformed old laws: (1) abolished *Polo* (forced labor) and heavy taxes upon native military servicemen; (2) created an Education Law which permitted Filipinos from entering collegiate and university-level institutions; (3) Formed the *Guardia Civil* to uphold civil safety from bandits, pirates, and criminals; and (4) Initiated the [[#The Secularization Movement|Secularization (Filipinization) of the Parishes]].

Despite the revolution, the constitution still required for a monarch to be present, and so Amadeo of Savoy became monarch, and the previous revolters were removed from power. The previous *Governador General*, dela Torre, was replaced by *Governador General* Rafael Izquierdo, who undid all of dela Torre's reforms and continued a rule of terror.
___
# The Secularization Movement
During *Governador General* dela Torre's rule over the Philippines, the Parishes, previously headed only by "Regular" priests (Spanish priests), were opened up to "Secular" priests (Filipino priests), as heading parishes was what they were trained for. The only time secular priests were permitted to take care of parishes was during the expulsion of the Jesuits, which ended quickly when the Jesuits were once again allowed to serve the Church.

**Fr. Padre Pelaez** headed the secularization of the parishes, something that had not been done before due to the distrust of the colonizers towards the natives, as being a head of the Church also allowed you some political power and ability to voice against the government. It was during an earthquake (that destroyed parts of the Manila Cathedral) that he met his untimely death. His follower, *Padre* **Jose Burgos**, took his place, aided by two other followers, *Padre* **Mariano Gomez** and *Padre* **Jacinto Zamora**. Together, they are now known as "*GomBurZa*".
___
# The Cavite Mutiny and Martyrdom of GomBurZa
The military rule of *Governador General* Rafael Izquierdo granted him various enemies from multiple sectors. Among those discontent were approximately 200 Filipino soldiers and workers stationed at Fort. San Felipe who, led by Sgt. **La Madrid**, staged a mutiny on **January 20, 1872** It lasted two days before they were eventually defeated by Lt. **Felipe Ginoves**, who received reinforcements from Manila. On **January 27, 1872**, many of the soldiers who surrendered were executed.

After the mutiny, the Spanish authorities magnified *Padre* **Jose Burgos** as the mastermind of the mutineers, as aided by **Jacinto Zamora** and **Mariano Gomez**. They were charged with rebellion. Those captured during the mutiny, particularly **Francisco Zaldua**, testified against GomBurZa, and insinuated it was not only a mutiny, but a rebellion which aimed to assassinate *Governador General* Rafael Izquierdo and attack Intramuros. It was said that they financed and masterminded the move, and was supported by native soldiers and citizens across multiple regions. The mutiny was simply a error that failed the whole grand plan. This magnification of the scale of the attack led the authorities to act against GomBurZa and sentence them to an execution. It was on **February 17, 1872** that the three were killed by strangulation via garrotte.
- This execution was witnessed by the brothers Paciano and Jose Rizal.
- Paciano, a trusted assistant of Burgos during the Filipinization of the Parishes, was dissuaded by his execution and left his college (Colegio de San Jose) at Manila and returned to Calamba. There, he told the heroic story of GomBurZa to his family, who kept secrecy towards anything related to Burgos to prevent any repercussions.
___
# Summary
1. **Rizal's Mother**: Teodora; "Lolay" was imprisoned at the end of 1871. She was held for two and a half years before being released.
	- **Characters**: Teodora (Rizal's mother), Jose Alberto (Lolay's sister), Teodora Formosa (Alberto's wife), Don Kikoy (Lolay's husband), Mayor Vivencio del Rosario (Pushing for her imprisonment).
	- **Dates**: 1871, after Christmas; 1873, when she was set free.
2. **Spanish Revolution**: Queen Isabel II was overthrown by Marshals Francisco Serrano and Juan Prim. Serrano became Marshal Regent, and implemented liberalism as an administrator. He appointed *Gov. Gen.* Carlos Ma. dela Torre to the Philippines where the following reforms took place: (1) removal of *Polo* and heavy taxes, (2) implementation of an Education Law permitting Filipinos into higher education, (3) creation of the *Guardia Civil*, and (4) Secularization of the Parishes. Soon after, the Spanish cortes removed Serrano from power, reinstituted military rule, and sent *Gov. Gen.* Rafael Izquierdo to the Philippines, who undid dela Torre's reforms.
	- Characters: Queen Isabel II (Spanish monarch), Marshals Francisco Serrano and Juan Prim (revolters), Gov. Gen. dela Torre (Good leader), Gov. Gen. Izquierdo (Bad leader)
3. **Secularization of the Parishes**: the Filipino (secular) priests were allowed to run parishes. The only time they had this power was when Jesuits were being removed. The movement was headed by *Padre* Pedro Pelaez. He died during an earthquake and was replaced by his follower *Padre* Burgos. Burgos was aided by two other followers, *Padre* Gomez and *Padre* Zamora. They were eventually blamed (with evidence and the testimony of Francisco Zaldua) as masterminds of the Cavity Mutiny and sentenced to execution by Gen. Gov. Izquierdo. They were garrotted on February 17, 1872.
	- Characters: Regular (Spanish) priests, Secular (Filipino) priests, Padre Pedro Pelaez, Padre Burgos, Padre Gomez, Padre Zamora, Francisco Zaldua, Gov. Gen. Izquierdo
4. **Cavity Mutiny**: following the reinstatement of taxes to those previously exempt, Gov. Gen. Izquierdo, Filipino soldiers and workers stationed at Fort San Felipe, led by **Sgt. La Madrid**, staged a mutiny on **January 20, 1872**. Afterwards, GomBurZa were implicated as masterminds to the mutiny, and were executed on  **February 17, 1872**.