---
tags:
  - CMPA
  - INC
title: "Chapter 02: The Female Reproductive System"
---
>[!CITE] Reference
>Salustiano, R. (2024). The Normal Antepartal Period. In *Dr. RPS Maternal & Newborn Care: A Comprehensive Review Guide and Source Book for Teaching and Learning* (2nd ed., pp. 80-116). C&E Publishing, Inc.

# The Vulva
The **external genitalia** of the female are collectively called the vulva. The **pudenda** is commonly designated the vulva.

The external soft, rounded, fatty pads that cushion over the symphysis pubis for protection is the **mons veneris or mons pubis**. This is the area covered by the triangular area known as the **escutcheon**, where curly hair grows after puberty.

The **labia majora**, "*bigger lips*", are two folds of skin with sparse hair on either side of the vaginal opening. It contains fat and Bartholin's glands (provides lubrication) that **protects the labia minora and vaginal os**. The **labia minora**, "*smaller lips*", are two thinner folds of delicate tissue within the labia majora, usually not visible behind the non-separated labia majora in nulliparas but common to project beyond the labia majora in multiparas. It is hairless, moist, and reddish (as if a mucous membrane), and contains many sebaceous follicles and a few sweat glands.
- Each labia minora superiorly bifurcate then converge into two lamellae with each pair, the **anterior** or upper pair forms the **prepuce**, and the lower pair fuse to form the **frenulum of the clitoris**.
- Inferiorly, the labia minora simply converges into the **fourchette**. The labia minora act to protect and obscure the vestibule, urinary meatus, and vaginal os.

The **clitoris** is a small body of highly erectile, erogenous, and sensitive tissue protected by the prepuce. It is composed a **glans**, a **corpus**, and two **crura**. It measures less than 1 cm in width by 2 cm in length, with less than 0.5 cm in diameter. It is covered by stratified squamous epithelium that is richly supplied with nerve endings (more than 10,000!); the vessels of the clitoris are connected with the vestibular bulbs. As such, it is sensitive to touch, pressure, and temperature. This makes it the **primary site of sexual arousal, excitement, and orgasm**. The principal female erogenous organ.
- In obstetrics, the clitoris is used as a landmark to guide female catheterization.
- It is the site of syphilitic chancre (in young women) and leukoplakia (in mature women).

Bounded by the **labia minora**, **clitoris**, and **fourchette**, the almond-shaped area with six openings is called **the vestibule**. The six openings include the urethral meatus, vaginal opening, and two Skene's glands and two Bartholin's glands.
1. **Urethral Opening/Meatus**: the anterior opening set midline, 1 to 1.5 cm below the pubic arch, above the vaginal os, and below the clitoris. This is how the clitoris functions as a landmark for catheterization. The urethra's short length predisposes women to urinary tract infection.
2. **Vaginal Opening**: the posterior opening, often hidden by overlapping labia minora in virginal women. An area called the **fossa navicularis** lies posterior to the vagina to the fourchette, usually only observed in nulliparous women.
	- **Hymen**: a thin membrane of various thickness, with no glandular or muscular elements and not richly supplied with nerve fibers. It surrounds the vaginal opening, and protects it. It also separates internal from external reproductive organs. It is very vascular in the newborn, thick and rich in glycogen in pregnant women, thin in menopausal women, and vary in thickness in adult women. It may be stretched or torn during physical activity, tampon insertion, vaginal examination, or sexual intercourse. Rupturing of this membrane may occasionally result in profuse bleeding. Its appearance cannot determine sexual activity.
		- **Myrtiformes Caruncles** are the remnants of the hymen after childbirth.
		- **Imperforate Hymen** is a rare lesion in which the vaginal os is occluded completely by the retention of menstrual blood and can be treated by surgical perforation.
3. **Skene's Glands** or **Paraurethral Glands**: two small, palpable glands that open into the posterior urethral wall. They secrete mucus to lubricate the vestibule.
	- A common site of gonococcal infection and other sexually transmitted diseases.
4. **Bartholin's Glands** or **Vulvovaginal Glands**: two small, palpable glands 0.5 to 1 cm in diameter situated beneath the vestibule on either side of the vaginal opening, with 1.5 to 2 cm long ducts that open on the vaginal orifice. At sexual arousal, these glands secrete alkaline mucoid material, altering the vaginal canal environment to favor motility and viability of sperms, particularly of androsperms (which are weak to acid).
	- The site of cyst (Bartholin's cyst), infection (Bartholinitis), and abscess formation.
5. **Vestibular Bulbs**: almond-shaped aggregation of veins 3 to 4 cm long, 1 to 2 cm wide, and 0.5 cm to 1 cm thick. They lie beneath the mucous membrane on either side of the vestibule, terminate anteriorly at about the middle of the vaginal opening, and extend upward toward the clitoris. These may be injured or even ruptured during childbirth, forming a vulvar hematoma.

The **perineum** is the area between the vagina and the rectum, consisting of fibromuscular tissue. Most of the support for the perineum is provided by **pelvic diaphragms**, consisting of levator ani muscles plus the coccygeous muscles posteriorly, and **urogenital diaphragms**, which are external to the pelvic diaphragm and include the triangular area between the ischial tuberosities and the symphysis and are made up of deep transverse perineal muscles, constrictor of the urethra, and internal and external facial coverings.
- Blood supply: internal pudendal artery and its branches, the inferior rectal artery, and the posterior labial artery
- Nerve supply: primarily the pudendal nerve.
___
# Internal Female Reproductive Organs
The **vagina** is a vascular, tubular, and musculomembranous structure that extends from the vulva to the uterus between the urinary bladder (anteriorly) and rectum (posteriorly). Its length is 3" to 4", with its posterior wall 10-cm long and anterior wall 7.5-cm long. It is the female organ of copulation, and the excretory canal of the uterus through which uterine secretions and menstrual flow escape. It also becomes a soft birth canal during labor.
-  The **vault** is the upper end of the vagina.
- The **posterior vaginal fornix** is the largest fornix because the vagina is attached to the uterus at a higher level at the back than in the front.
- The **anterior vaginal fornix** lies in front of the cervix. Lateral vaginal fornices lie on either side.
- There are multiple **vaginal layers**:
	1. **Inner lining**: **squamous epithelium**, under which is a vascular connective tissue.
	2. **Middle muscular layer**: divided into a weak inner coat and a stronger outer coat of longitudinal fibers.
	3. **Pelvis fascia**: surrounding the vagina, forming a layer of connective tissue.
- The vagina has **rugae** (folds), transverse ridges of mucous membranes lining the vagina, which allow it to stretch during sexual intercourse and childbirth.
- **Vaginal pH** is normally 4 to 6 pH. This acidity is created by **Doderlein's bacilli** consuming glycogen in the inner lining of the vagina, and producing **lactic acid** as a result.

The **uterus** is the hollow, muscular, pear-shaped (pyriform) organ; covered partially by the peritoneum