---
title: "Chapter 04: Fertilization and Fetal Development"
tags:
  - CMPA
---
>[!CITE] Reference
>Salustiano, R. (2024). Fertilization and Fetal Development. In *Dr. RPS Maternal & Newborn Care: A Comprehensive Review Guide and Source Book for Teaching and Learning* (2nd ed., pp. 64-79). C&E Publishing, Inc.

**Fertilization** (conception, fecundation, impregnation) is the union of a mature egg cell (ovum) and sperm cell in the ampulla (outer third) of the fallopian tube. The resulting fertilized egg is called the **zygote**.

Sperm move within the female reproductive system through flagellar action. Each sperm often reach the ampulla within 5 minutes, up to 4 to 6 hours after ejaculation. From 400 million or more sperm, only ~200 actually reach the ampulla. Sperm often remain for 4 to 6 hours before being able to fertilize an egg, as this period is when sperm capacitation and acrosomal reaction occurs:
1. **Sperm Capacitation**: the sperm becomes hypermobile, and the acrosomal membrane/covering of the sperm head becomes exposed, allowing it to bind with the **zona pellucida** of the ovum.
2. **Acrosomal Reaction**: the deposition of minute amounts of **hyaluronidase** in the **corona radiata**, allowing the sperm to penetrate the ovum.

As soon as the sperm penetrates the zona pellucida and makes contact with the **vitelline membrane** of the ovum, a cellular change occurs in the ovum that inhibits other sperm cells from entering. This process is mediated by the release of materials from cortical granules (organelles) just under the egg surface.

Fertilization occurs when the male pronucleus units with the female pronucleus; thus, the chromosome diploid number (46) is restored and a new cell, the **zygote**, is created with a new combination of genetic material, which creates a unique individual different from the parents and anyone else.

The zygote undergoes **cleavage/mitosis**, in sequential order:
1. **Zygote**: the cell that results from fertilization of the ovum by a spermatozoa. This cell undergoes **mitosis**, which is the process of cell replication where each chromosome splits longitudinally to form a double-stranded structure.
2. **Cleavage**: a series of mitotic cell divisions by the zygote
3. **Blastomere**: daughter cells arising from the mitotic cell division of the zygote (2-cell, 4-cell, and 8-cell blastomeres).
4. **Morula**: a solid ball of cells produced by 16 or so blastomeres; called the "traveling" form because it is in this form when it migrates through the fallopian tube (oviduct) and reaches the uterine cavity about 3 to 4 days after fertilization.
5. **Blastocyst**: a fluid-filled cavity that reaches the uterine cavity.
>[!INFO] Morula Reformation
>The morula reforms to become the blastocyst; the cavity within the morula is the **blastocoele**. This cavity expands, and the outer cells of the morula become the **trophoblast**. It is after this reformation that energy becomes necessary, and the blastocyst implants into the uterine wall for further development.

**Implantation**, also known as **nidation**, occurs within 6 to 9 days (average 7 days) after fertilization. In a normal implantation, the site is in the **upper fundal portion** or upper one-third of the uterus, either anteriorly or posteriorly. Abnormal implantation sites are the fallopian tubes (ectopic pregnancy) and the lower uterine segment (placenta previa).
>[!INFO] Blastocyst
>While the blastocyst is in the **stage of implantation**, its outer layer, the **trophoblast**, is responsible for actual implantation (nidation). The trophoblast gives rise to the placenta.
___

# The Placenta
The placenta is a **discoid** (15 to 20 cm in diameter by 2 to 3 cm thick) product of conception in the uterus, positioned anteriorly or posteriorly near the fundus. Its base is always where the site of implantation occurs. It consists of two sides, the **fetal side** and the **maternal side**:
1. **Fetal Side**: covered with amnion; under which fetal vessels course with the arteries passing over the veins. An **amnion** is 0.02 to 0.5 mm in thickness, a sac that engulfs the growing fetus. The clear fluid that accumulates within the amniotic cavity is the **amniotic fluid**.
2. **Maternal Side**: irregular lobes consisting of fibrous tissue with sparse vessels confined mainly to the base.

By the time the pregnancy reaches term, the placenta is, on average, 500 grams in weight. The weight-ratio at term in an average fetus and placenta (feto-placental weight ratio) is 6:1 (3,000 grams to 500 grams).

The placenta forms with the union of the chorionic villi and the **desidua basalis**. The **Decidua** is the endometrium during pregnancy; thickening to 5 to 10 mm. It consists of multiple layers and sublayers:
1. **Decidua Basalis**: the base layer, under the embedded ovum, directly under the site of implantation.
2. **Decidua Capsularis**: the portion overlying the developing ovum; separates the ovum from the rest of the uterine cavity; most prominent by the second month.
3. **Decidua Vera/Desidua Perietalis**: lines the remainder of the uterus.
4. **Layers of the Decidua Basalis and Vera**:
	- **Zona Compacta**: uppermost/surface layer made up on compact cells.
	- **Zona Spongiosum**: the middle, spongy layer; with glands and small blood vessels. Along with zona basalis, it is the functional layer (zona functionales) as it is to this layer that implantation occurs.
	- **Zona Basalis**: lowermost/basal layer. This is regenerated into a new endometrium after placenta separation.
5. **Decidual Aging**: **Nitabuch's Layer**, a zone of fibrinoid degeneration, is where the invading trophoblast meets the decidua. This layer is usually absent whenever the decidua is defective.

>[!INFO] Placental Maturity
>The placenta begins developing within the second month of pregnancy, and becomes completely functional on the third month of gestation. It functions most effectively through 40 to 41 weeks, and may be dysfunctional beyond 42 weeks.

Placental functions vary, and play vital roles in nutritive, respiratory, excretory, protective, and endocrine systems:
1. **Nutritive**: transports nutrients and water-soluble vitamins to the fetus via fluid/gas transport.
2. **Respiratory**: serves as the fetal organ of respiration.
3. **Excretory**: the amniotic fluid is the medium of excretion.
4. **Protective**: the placental barrier defends against organisms and substances like heparin and bacteria. It is ineffective against viruses, alcohol, nicotine, antibiotics, depressants, and stimulants.
5. **Endocrine**: production of estrogen, progesterone, human chorionic gonadotropins (hCG), and human placental lactogen (hPL), also called chorionic somatomammotropin (hCS).
	- The major source of **estrogen** and **progesterone** after the first two months.
	- **hCG**: secreted as early as 8 to 10 days after fertilization, detected in serum as early as the time of implantation by the most sensitive pregnancy test, radioimmunoassay (RIA). Detected in urine by 10 days (2 weeks) after the first amenorrheic period. It **prolongs the lifespan of the corpus luteum**, and **serves as the basis of pregnancy tests**. It is found to be elevated in cases of excessive vomiting. Normally, its value is 50,000 to 400,000 IU/24 hours.
	- **hCS**/**hPL**: secreted by the third week after ovulation, influencing somatic cellular growth (resembling growth hormone). It is the **principal diabetogenic factor**, being a major insulin antagonist/glucose sparing hormone. It **prepares the breasts of the mother for lactation**.
## Placental/Cord Abnormalities
1. **Placenta Succenturiata**
2. **Placental Infarcts**
3. **Placenta bipartita**
4. **Placenta tripartita**
5. **Placenta circumvallata**
6. **Battledore placenta**
7. **Velamentous insertion of the cord**
8. **Cord loops**
9. **Cord torsion**
10. **Cord knots**
___
# The Umbilical Cord
Also known as the **funis**, it is a 30 to 100 cm (average 55 cm) cord with a diameter of 0.8 to 2.0 cm at term. It extends from the fetal surface to the placenta to the fetal umbilicus, serving to transport oxygen and nutrients, and returning metabolic wastes from the fetus to the placenta. It contains three umbilical vesses (*mn. AVA*): one vein and two arteries. These cords spiral in a dextral or sinistral manner, believed to prevent clamping.
1. **Umbilical Vein**: carries oxygenated blood to the fetus.
2. **Umbilical arteries**: carries deoxygenated blood from the fetus to the placenta.

>[!INFO] Protective Covering of the Funis
>The cord is covered by **Wharton's Jelly**, a specialized gelatinous connective tissue, an extension of the amnion that prevents cord compression.
___
# The Amniotic Fluid