---
title: The Normal Antepartal Period
tags:
  - CMPA
---
>[!CITE] Reference
>Salustiano, R. (2024). The Normal Antepartal Period. In *Dr. RPS Maternal & Newborn Care: A Comprehensive Review Guide and Source Book for Teaching and Learning* (2nd ed., pp. 80-). C&E Publishing, Inc.

The **antepartal period** is the period of pregnancy or the period before labor, also called the *prenatal* or the *antenatal period*. The woman in this period is called the **gravida**. It is part of the perinatal period, extending from one year before to two  years after (18-24 months) giving birth.
___
# Duration of Pregnancy
A normal pregnancy lasts for 267 to 280 days; 9 calendar months; 10 lunar months; 40 weeks; or 3 trimesters. The best measurement for gestational age (AOG) and length of pregnancy is weeks. The expected date of confinement (EDC) is at 40 weeks AOG.
1. **First Trimester**: the period of **rapid organogenesis**, where teratogens (alcohol, drugs, viruses, and radiation) cause the most damage.
2. **Second Trimester**: the most comfortable period, with continued growth of the fetus.
3. **Third Trimester**: rapid deposition of fats, iron (8th  month), and calcium (7th month), as the period with the most rapid fetal growth.
___
# Physiological Adaptations in Pregnancy
## Reproductive System
The **Uterus** grows from 7.5 × 4 × 2.5 cm, pyriform/pear-shaped%%(3 × 2 × 1 inches, Sir V.)%% to 32 × 24 × 22 cm, globular/oval. Its weight increases from 60 ~ 70 grams to 1,000 grams. Despite this, no new uterine muscle is formed. The existing muscle fibers become hypertrophic, and new fibroelastic tissues form to make stronger uterine walls. Changes are progressive.
1. 12 weeks: the corpus and fundus become globular; almost spherical.
2. **Fundal Height** is at the level of the symphysis pubis until the 12th week, and is generally only palpable by the 13th week just above the symphysis pubis. It reaches the umbilicus by the 20th to 22nd week, and the xiphoid process by the early 36th week. This is also expressed in **Bartholomew's Rule**.
3. **Increased vascularity** (because of Estrogen) results in three **probable signs of pregnancy**:
	- **Hegar's Sign**: softening of the isthmus.
	- **Goodell's Sign**: softening of the cervix
	- **Chadwick's Sign**: blue/purple discoloration of the cervix and vaginal mucosa. This may also be seen as a presumptive sign of labor as observed by the pregnant woman.
4. **Braxton Hicks Contractions**: intermittent, irregular, painless, abdominal, and false labor contractions felt by 4 months, and is more pronounced on the 8th month.
5. **Ballottement**: rebounding of the fetal head against examining fingers by 4 to 5 months (16th to 18th week of gestation). This is felt by healthcare examiners on the third Leopold's Maneuver (Pawlick's Maneuver).
6. **Secondary Amenorrhea**: often the first sign that alerts a woman to pregnancy; the lengthened lifespan of the corpus luteum (from two weeks to two months) prevents another menstrual period to initiate.
7. **Uterine Electrical Activity**: low and uncoordinated in early gestation, progressively intensifying and synchronizing at term. This synchronization occurs twice as fast in multiparas.

The **cervix** becomes shorter, thicker, and more elastic. Its mucosal lining increases mucus production (from edema  and thickening), which creates the **mucus plug** by week 7 that protects the uterus from bacterial contamination. As previously mentioned, this is also subject to **Chadwick's Sign**, becoming discolored to blue/purple from increased vascularity. The **vagina** also becomes thicker and hypertrophic, thickening the vaginal mucosa. **Leukorrhea** occurs as whitish, mucoid, non-foul, non-pruritic vaginal secretions increase along with estrogen. Vaginal acidity increases, adding protection against bacterial invasion.

**Ovulation and maturation cease** as the **ovaries' function is overtaken by the corpus luteum in early pregnancy**; it functions maximally during the first 6 to 7 months of pregnancy.

The **perineum** becomes hypertrophic, experiences edema, and relaxation. It also becomes a deeper color due to vascularization. The **breasts** increase in size and firmness. The areola and surrounding skin darkens and enlarges, along with the alveoli system, alveoli duct, and Montgomery's glands. Superficial veins enlarge and become prominent. Breastfeeding can be done as early as 4 to 5 months (for other infants, if needed), as **colostrum begins to be produced**.
## Endocrine System
The major endocrine organ during pregnancy is the **placenta**. Its chorion (15 to 20) secrete Human Chorionic Gonadotropins (hCG) which (a) maintain the corpus luteum by **secreting progesterone in early pregnancy**, its most important function, and (b) aids in diagnosing pregnancy, as it is detectable in **serum** (by 8 to 10 days after implantation) and **urine** (**by 10 to 14 days after first missed menstruation**). hCG is found to be elevated in pregnant women experiencing vomiting.
- The **placenta matures by 10 to 12 weeks** (3 months), increasing placental hormones estrogen, progesterone, hCG, and hPL/hCS (Human Placental Lactogen/Human Chorionic Somatomammotropin).
>[!BUG] hPL is the major diabetogenic hormone in pregnancy, contributing to gestational DM.

The **anterior pituitary gland** becomes ready for breastfeeding through increase **prolactin**. FSH production from the APG does not result in ovulation. The **posterior pituitary gland** (PPG) secretes **oxytocin** from the hypothalamus when fetal head pressure on the cervix increases. Oxytocin acts to stimulate the uterine myometrium, causing uterine contractions and labor onset, especially with the decrease in progesterone, which inhibit contractions, in late pregnancy.

**Thyroid changes** result in increased basal metabolic rate (BMR), only returning to normal levels 6 weeks postpartum. This is due to elevated serum estrogen, placental effects, and renal clearance of iodide. Increased BMP is manifested by increased pulse rate and cardiac output, a slight rise in temperature, and heat intolerance. The **Parathyroid glands** enhance calcium and phosphorus metabolism to meet fetal needs of calcium. If calcium needs are not met, maternal cramping occur from calcium-phosphorus imbalance.
- The **pancreas** increase insulin production in response to increased metabolism.

Finally, the **adrenal cortex** increase **cortisol production** to promote metabolism and activate gluconeogenesis (protein to glucose) when energy is required, and **aldosterone** for sodium retention (and therefore water reabsorption), resulting in the *cushingoid features* of pregnancy
## Respiratory Systems
The **lungs** have a slight increase in vital capacity. Oxygen consumption increases by 15% from 6 to 40 weeks of pregnancy. The fetus consumes oxygen and contributes carbon dioxide, demanding increased oxygen and increased excretion of carbon dioxide. This creates a tendency to **hyperventilate**, resulting in dizziness, lightheadedness, pallor, and tingling sensation on fingertips/lips.
- Resolve hyperventilation and avoid respiratory alkalosis by promoting re-breathing with a paper bag or cupped hands.

The gravid woman experiences increased vascularity (from estrogen) of **the nose**, contributing to common **epistaxis**, **nasal stuffiness**, hoarseness, eustachian tube blockage (potential temporary deafness). **Respiratory rate** does not vary largely, reaching a maximum of 24 respirations per minute while at rest (normally 20). Lung volume may decrease based on mechanical, hormonal, or biochemical influences.

The **diaphragm** rises by as much as one inch at the final month of pregnancy (week 36 to 38), resulting shortness of breath or dyspnea. This discomfort of pregnancy is relieved after **lightening**, the descent of the fetal presenting part into the pelvic inlet.
## Circulatory System
Cardiac rate increases by 10 to 15 BPM in the second and third trimesters. Blood pressure remains constant by may drop slight in the second trimester. Disturbance of blood pressure is primarily due to **vena caval syndrome**/**supine hypotensive syndrome**, where the inferior vena cava becomes compression when laying in a supine position, decreasing cardiac output and producing hypotension. This is managed by remaining in a **left lateral recumbent position**.
- Palpitations may occur due to sympathetic nervous system disturbances (early pregnancy) or increased intraabdominal pressure (late pregnancy). Transient murmurs (increased blood viscosity and displacement of the heart) and slight cardiomegaly also occur.
- Increased tissue demands and water retention increase **cardiac output by 20% to 30%**, and **blood volume by 30% to 50%**. Physiologic anemia may occur, where red blood cells are not proportionate with the blood volume.
- As previously mentioned, estrogen levels increase vascularity, producing Hegar's, Goodell's, and Chadwick's signs. Pelvic veins become distended and leg varicosities appear.
- **Fibrinogen** increases by 50% due to progesterone, which increases risk for thromboembolism, e.g. DVT. Monitor for DVT with Homan's sign.

| Parameter         | Value in Pregnancy                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| ----------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Red Blood Cells   | Increased by 30%, but often drops in the second and third trimesters.                                                                                                                                      |
| Hemoglobin        | 12 to 15 g/dL                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| Hematocrit        | 37% to 42% in pregnancy. This may drop by 10% in the second and third trimesters from pseudoanemia/physiologic anemia.                                                                                     |
| White Blood Cells | Elevated to 5,500 to 11,500/mm<sup>3</sup> in pregnancy, 20,000/mm<sup>3</sup> in labor, and 25,000/mm<sup>3</sup> postpartum. These findings are normal; leukocytosis is not usually a sign of infection. |
## Gastrointestinal System
1. **Mouth**: increased estrogen; increased saliva acidity, salivation in women with nausea (ptyalism) disappearing after delivery, increased vascularity (soft and swollen gums, difficulty chewing, bleeding), and potential benign mouth tumors from vascular proliferation.
2. **Stomach**: displaced backwards, with bowel sounds potentially unheard in all quadrants. Difficult digestion results from pressure/compression by the gravid uterus, resulting in **pyrosis** (heartburn), a discomfort of pregnancy. Motility, digestion, and emptying time are all slowed due to **progesterone**. This also contributes to **morning sickness**, another discomfort of pregnancy.
3. **Gastrointestinal Tract Relaxation**: as an effect of progesterone; contributes to morning sickness, flatulence, constipation, and hemorrhoids as discomforts of pregnancy.
4. **Gall Bladder**: another organ relaxed by progesterone, delaying emptying time. Prolonged storage predisposes the cholesterol to crystallize, forming a **gallstone**.
5. **Liver**: displaced, but blood flow is not affected. Laboratory findings may mimic liver disease, as albumin is decreased by 30%, serum alkaline phosphatase is increased by two to three times, and cholesterol is double the nonpregnant level (normally 150 to 200 mg/dL).
6. **Urinary System**: urinary frequency is present in the first and third trimesters, when the uterus places pressure on the bladder. In the second trimester, as the uterus rises to the abdominal cavity, the uterus undergoes retroversion. Renal function is also compromised by the **vena caval syndrome**. Management is the same.
	- Renal plasma flow* is increased by 25% to 50%. It is normal by the end of the third trimester.
	- Glomerular* filtration rate (GFR) is increased by 50% in the second and third trimester. This increases urinary output with decreased specific gravity.
	- Increased renal tubular reabsorption rate, urea clearance, and creatinine clearance.
	- Bladder capacity is 1,500 mL in the second trimester.
	- Glycosuria occurs as glucose threshold decreases.
	- The smooth muscles of the bladder and ureters relax, persisting for up to 4/6 weeks after delivery and results in ureter dilation, decreased bladder tone, and increased potential for stasis and UTI.
## Integumentary System
Starting from the second trimester onwards, various marks may appear:
1. **Chloasma**: dark patches on the cheeks, nose, and neck; the "*mask of pregnancy*" due to increased melanocyte-stimulating hormones of pregnancy.
2. **Linea Nigra**: a dark line from the symphysis pubis upward to the xiphoid process due to increased estrogen.
3. **Striae Gravidarum**: stretch marks; silvery streaks on the abdomen, upper thighs, and lower breasts due to adrenal hypertrophy.
4. **Palmar Erythema**: redness of the palms from vascularization by estrogen.
5. **Vascular Spider Nevi**: redness of the face from vascularization by estrogen.
6. **Diaphoresis**: resulting from increased BMR (from [[#Endocrine System|thyroid gland changes]]).
## Musculoskeletal Changes
**Increased estrogen, progesterone, and relaxin relaxes ligaments and joints**; softening and **relaxation of the symphysis pubis and sacroiliac joints** (increased size of the birth canal), **pelvic looseness** (resulting in a **waddling gait**), and **difficulty in maintaining balance**.
- Due to impaired balance, bathing in tubs is not suggested.

The added stress on the ligaments and muscles of the mid- and lower spine results in **backache**. This is further contributed to by **lordosis** as the center of gravity shifts forward during pregnancy.

Fetal bone ossification on the seventh month depleted calcium,  predisposing the mother to **leg cramps** from calcium-phosphorus imbalance. the pressure of the gravid uterus on the nerves supplying the lower extremities also contribute.
___
# Psychosocial Adaptations of Pregnancy

| First Trimester                   | Second Trimester                                        | Third Trimester                                             |
| --------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------- |
| Denial                            | Acceptance                                              |                                                             |
| Ambivalence; Emotional Lability   | Fantasizing/Day-dreaming                                | Fear, anxiety, dreams of labor, pain, mutilation, and death |
| Focusing on the self              | Introspective, evaluating marriage, career, and in-laws | Preparing for birth; **nesting behavior**, role-playing     |
| Task: **acceptance** of pregnancy | Task: preparation for **physical separation**           | Task: attainment of **maternal role**                       |

The nurse must understand these psychosocial adaptations and implement them into care:
1. **Encourage the pregnant woman to verbalize and express her feelings**, concerns, and discomforts. Encourage her to ask questions.
2. **Validate the normalcy of women's feelings and reactions** in order to **provide psychological support**.
3. **Improve level of maternal comfort**. Provide health teachings related to the prevention and management of common discomforts of pregnancy and the daily hygiene of pregnancy.
4. Recommend **attendance in prenatal classes** in the third trimester.

## Seven Dimensions of Maternal Development (Lederma & Weis)
1. **Acceptance** of the pregnancy
2. **Motivation and preparation** for motherhood
3. **Relationship** with husband/partner
4. **Relationship** with her own mother
5. **Preparation for labor**
6. **Sense of control in labor**
7. **Self-esteem and well-being in labor**
___
# Signs of Pregnancy
The signs of pregnancy are divided into three categories. **Presumptive signs** are those felt by the mother herself, **probable signs** are those observed by a healthcare provider, and **positive signs** are those emanating from the fetus itself.
## Presumptive Signs
**Presumptive signs** are subjective; may be noticed by the women but are not conclusive proof of pregnancy, which are:
- **Amenorrhea**: first sign at two weeks from fertilization because of persistence of corpus luteum.
- **Nausea and Vomiting**: the most common forms of discomfort.
- **Urinary Frequency**: most disturbing sign, especially in the third trimester.
- **Fatigue**: from estrogen, in early pregnancy.
- **Breast Changes**: tingling of the nipples (4 weeks), darkening and enlargement of areola, enlargement of the breasts, and increased number of milk-secreting cells.
- **Skin changes**: chloasma, linea nigra, striae gravidarum, diaphoresis
- **Quickening**, often felt stronger at 10 weeks.
- **Leukorrhea**: whitish, mucoid vaginal discharge due to estrogen.
- **Weight increase**: an unusual increase in weight not caused by a change in diet.
## Probable Signs
**Probable signs** are objective as noticed or observed by the healthcare provider but still not conclusive of pregnancy, which are:
- **Abdominal enlargement** from uterine growth.
- **Goodell's sign**: softening of the cervix.
- **Hegar's sign**: softening of the isthmus (lower uterine segment) and compressibility of the uterus.
- **Chadwick's sign**: blue/purple discoloration of the cervix, vaginal mucosa, and perineum.
- **Braxton Hicks contractions**: painless abdominal contractions relieved by walking.
- **Ballottement**: rebound of the fetus against examining fingers.
- **Positive pregnancy test**: due to the presence and rising levels of hCG in maternal blood and urine. This may still be a false positive, e.g. in a hydatidiform mole that produces hCG.
- **Radioimmunoassay** (RIA): test for the beta subunit of hCG, potentially accurate enough for the diagnosis of a pregnancy.
## Positive Signs
**Positive signs** are objective; emanate from the fetus; conclusive for pregnancy, which are:
- **Fetal Heart Tones** (FHT)
- **Fetal Outline** (upon UTZ)
- **Fetal Parts** (examiner palpation)
- **Fetal Skeleton**, as seen via x-ray imaging (not to be done before 16 weeks due to unsafe exposure to radiation).
___
# Common Discomforts of Pregnancy
| Discomfort              | Cause                                                                                                               | Relief Measures                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| ----------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Morning Sickness**    | Progesterone effect                                                                                                 | - Eat dry crackers (or toast) 30 minutes before arising in the morning.<br>- Eat small, frequent meals and avoid fatty, acidic, and highly seasoned foods.<br>- Drink adequate fluids between meals.                                    |
| **Pyrosis**             | Progesterone effect, gastric compression by the gravid uterus                                                       | - Bend **at the knees** when picking things up off the floor.<br>- Remain upright for 3 to 4 hours after eating.<br>- Avoid taking sodium bicarbonate. Take aluminum-bearing antacids as ordered.                                       |
| **Constipation**        | Progesterone effect, particularly of GI relaxation and decreased motility.                                          | - Increase **fluids and fiber**.<br>- Increase activity/exercise.<br>- Establish a bowel movement routine/schedule.<br>- Drink warm water in the morning.                                                                               |
| **Hemorrhoids**         | Progesterone effect, particularly of GI relaxation.                                                                 | - Avoid constipation and other forms of straining.<br>- Promote comfort: sitz bath, warm compresses.<br>- Reinsert hemorrhoids, upon the physician's recommendation.                                                                    |
| **Flatulence**          | Progesterone effect, particularly of GI relaxation.                                                                 | - Eat small, frequent meals.<br>- Avoid gas-forming foods.                                                                                                                                                                              |
| **Urinary Frequency**   | Pressure on the bladder by the gravid uterus, increased GMR in the 2nd and 3rd trimester.                           | - Increase fluids to replace losses, except for bed time to prevent nocturia.                                                                                                                                                           |
| **Vena Caval Syndrome** | A.K.A. Supine Hypotension Syndrome. Caused by vena caval pressure from the gravid uterus, decreasing cardiac output | - Avoid sudden changes in position.<br>- Avoid staying supine.<br>- Arise from the bed gradually, with a lateral position.<br>- Avoid staying in one position for long periods.<br>- Assume frequent left-lateral positions in bed.     |
| **Edema**               | Increased aldosterone (salt-saving, water-retention) and pressure on the inferior vena cava.                        | - Assume a left-lateral position or elevate the legs frequently to promote venous return. Avoid prolonged standing.<br>- No round/constricting garters.<br>-Report swelling of the hands and face. Edema should predominantly be pedal. |
| **Shortness of Breath** | Pressure on the diaphragm by the gravid uterus.                                                                     | - Maintain good posture.<br>- Avoid fatigue.<br>- Elevate the head with several pillows; avoid supine position.<br>- Avoid constricting clothing and brassieres.<br>- Report increasing dyspnea at rest prior to 36 weeks.              |
| **Varicosities**        | Pressure on the femoral vein and inferior vena cava by the gravid uterus.                                           | - Avoid round garters around the abdomen and legs (knee-high stockings).<br>- Wear a supportive (hip-high) panty hose.<br>- Frequent elevation of the legs and hips is advised.                                                         |
| **Leg Cramps**          | Calcium-phosphorus imbalance from fetal bone ossification (7th month).                                              | - Increase dietary calcium, with Vitamin D.<br>- Avoid prolonged standing and sitting.<br>- Dorsiflex the foot, extend the knee to hyperextend the involved muscle.                                                                     |
| **Backache**            | Forward-shifting of the center of mass results in lordosis, and pressure on the bones and ligaments.                | - Maintain good posture. Avoid prolonged standing.<br>-Wear flat shoes.<br>-Engage in regular, gently physical activity.<br>- Use a supportive mattress.<br>- Wear a maternity girdle in selected situations as recommended.            |
| **Fatigue**             | Due to increased metabolic rate                                                                                     | - Adequate rest and sleep<br>- Avoid prolonged standing<br>- Practice good body mechanics (posture).<br>- Report increasing fatigue with regular activities (*gravida cardia*)                                                          |
___
# Prenatal Management
**Prenatal checkups** are done to improve maternal and neonatal outcomes. The **first Visit** is as soon as the mother misses a menstrual period when pregnancy is suspected. Following this, the schedule of visits are:

| Trimester     | DOH (4 total visits)         | WHO (14 total visits) | RPS (14 total visits)                                               |
| ------------- | ---------------------------- | --------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| 1st Trimester | Once before the second month | Once a month          | Once a month                                                        |
| 2nd Trimester | Once before the sixth month  | Once every two weeks  | Once a month                                                        |
| 3rd Trimester | Once before the eighth month | Once a week           | Once a month (to 8th month), then twice a month for the third month |
| Final Month   | Once on the final month      | Once                  | Once a week on the final month (36th to 40th week)                  |
Frequency increases if danger signals are present, or if known risk factors are established.
## Conducting Visits
1. **Baseline Data Collection**
2. **Obstetrical History**
3. **Medical and Surgical History**
4. **Family History**
5. **Current Problems**
6. **Initial and Subsequent Visits**
7. **Obstetrical History**
8. **Estimates of Pregnancy**
9. **Age of Gestation**
## Estimates of Pregnancy
1. **Naegele's Rule** (EDC, EDD): add seven days to the first day of the last menstrual period (LMP), and subtract three months, and one year.
	- Ex: $04/10/2023 + -03/07/0001 = 01/17/2024$
2. **Mittendorf's Rule** (EDC, EDD): alteration of Naegele's rule; takes into account the woman's race and gravidity.
	- **Caucasian and G1**: $\text{EDC/EDD} = (\text{LMP} + 15 \text{ days}) - 3 \text{ months}$
	- **Non-Caucasian and G>1**: $\text{EDC/EDD}=(\text{LMP}+10\text{ days})-3\text{ months}$
3. **Date of Quickening ($Q$)**: taking into account gravidity only,
	- **Primigravida**: $Q+4\text{ months and }20\text{ days}=\text{EDC/EDD}$
	- **Multigravida**: $Q+5\text{ months and }4\text{ days}=\text{EDC/EDD}$
4. **Fundal Height** (FH)/**Bartholomew's Rule**: can also help estimate EDC/EDD. Prior to examination, the mother needs to **void**.
	- FH @ **Symphysis Pubis**: 12 weeks (3 months)
	- FH @ **Umbilicus**: 20 to 22 weeks (5 months)
	- FH @ **Xiphoid Process**: 36 weeks (early 9th month)
## Age of Gestation
1. **LMP**/**Gestational Age**/**Menstrual Age**: calculation of the duration since the last menstrual period. **Ovulator age** or **fertilization age** is calculated from the time of ovulation or fertilization. These are two weeks shorter. LMP dating has a 95% prediction interval of ±4.65 weeks (Lee et al., 2020). Mothers may also be unsure of their last menstrual period.
2. **Ultrasound**: a better (Self et al., 2022) determination of gestational age; cerebellar measurement appears to be the most accurate.
3. **McDonald's Rule**: determination of AOG based on fundal height (FH) used in the second and third trimesters. Measure the distance from the **top** of the symphysis pubis over the curve of the abdomen to the top of the uterine fundus using a tape measure.
	- AOG in lunar weeks: $\text{FH in cm}\times8/7$
	- AOG in lunar months: $\text{FH in cm}\times2/7$
4. **Bartholomew's Rule of Fours**: estimates gestational age based on fundic height. Prior to examination, the mother needs to **void**.
	- FH @ **Symphysis Pubis**: 3 months
	- FH between the symphysis pubis and umbilicus: 4 months
	- FH @ **Umbilicus**: 5 months
	- FH just above umbilicus: 6 months
	- FH between the umbilicus and xiphoid process: 7 months
	- FH just below the xiphoid process: 8 months, or late 9th month due to lightening.
	- FH @ **Xiphoid Process**: early 9th month
5. **Gestational Age Calculator** (Michalowska & Smialek, 2023): assessing gestational age by estimated due date (EDD).
	- $\text{LMP}=\text{EDD}-280\text{ days}$
	- $\text{Current Date}-\text{LMP}=\text{GA}$
6. **Ultrasonography**: measurement of the biparietal diameter. A biparietal diameter of 9.5 cm is found in a mature fetus, often obtained at the 36th week.
7. **X-ray**: done only at the 16th week onwards; the distal femoral ossification is present at 36 weeks, and proximotibial ossification is present at maturation. 
8. **Date of Quickening**: felt at the 20th week.
9. **Identification of FHT**: at 12 weeks by Doppler.
## Fetal Dimensions
1. **Estimated Fetal Weight** (EFW):
	- **Johnson's Rule**: utilizes fundal height to estimate fetal weight, and varies based on **engagement**.
		- $\text{EFW in grams}=(\text{FH}-11)\times155$ if not engaged
		- $\text{EFW in grams}=(\text{FH}-12)\times155$ if engaged
2. **Estimated Fetal Length** (EFL):
	- **Haase's Rule**: utilizes gestational age to estimate the fetal length in centimeters.
		- First five months of the pregnancy: $\text{AOG in months}^2$ 
		- Second half of the pregnancy: $\text{AOG in months}\times5$
___
# Hygiene of Pregnancy
