---
tags:
  - QNA
---
A 65-year-old patient underwent an annual medical checkup. Which of the following is a risk factor for the development of coronary artery disease?
1. Low levels of HDL cholesterol
2. Low levels of LDL cholesterol
3. Low concentration of triglycerides
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization
>Option 1 displays dyslipidemia. HDLs should be >40 mg/dL, LDLs should be <100 mg/dL, TG should be <150 mg/dL, and total cholesterol should be <200 mg/dL. All of these levels may be maintained by **exercise**.

A nurse receives emergency laboratory results for a client with chest pain and immediately informs the physician. An increased brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) suggests which of the following?
1. Pericarditis
2. Endocarditis
3. Heart failure
4. Myocardial damage
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization
>Heart failure increases the body's need to remove fluids due to congestion. BNP is one of the compensatory mechanisms. Pericarditis and endocarditis would fit with tests for ESR and CRP. Myocardial damage can reflect through Troponin I/T (best), CKMB, lactate dehydrogenase (last), and myoglobin (earliest).

For a 72-year-old client with edema in the leg and periorbital area, the most important nursing diagnosis is:
1. Pain related to deteriorating health status
2. Decreased fluid volume related to fluid retention and altered compensatory mechanisms
3. Decreased ejection fraction related to reduced myocardial contractility
4. Impaired airway clearance related to accumulation of secretions
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization
>The scenario indicates heart failure. Ejection fraction becomes decreased in heart failure from a deficiency in contractility. Edema is often the result of heart failure, liver failure, or kidney failure.

A patient who is receiving digitalis preparations should be observed for symptoms of toxicity, which include:
1. Edema
2. Bleeding
3. Vomiting
4. Tinnitus
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization
>Vomiting (GI disturbances) is among the earliest result of digitalis toxicity. Edema may be caused by calcium channel blockers (-*dipine*). Bleeding is often caused by anticoagulants, anti-platelets, thrombolytics. Tinnitus is often caused by streptomycin.

Which of the following will appear abnormal in the ECG when there is hypokalemia?
1. Prolonged PR interval
2. ST segment changes
3. Peaked T wave
4. Prolonged QT interval
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization
>Hypokalemia causes ST segment changes. Other electrolytes that cause ECG changes include: potassium, calcium, and magnesium. Prolonged PR interval is found in heart block, a peaked T wave is found in hyperkalemia, and a prolonged QT interval is found in hypocalcemia.
>- Hypokalemia results in U-wave changes, ST changes (ST depression, flat T waves).
>- Hyperkalemia results in a peaked T wave.
>- Hypocalcemia results in a prolonged QT interval.
>- Hypercalcemia results in a shortened QT interval.
>- Hypomagnesemia results in ventricular tachycardia.
>- Hypermagnesemia results in ventricular bradycardia.
>
>Heart Block ECG Changes:
>- 1st Degree: Prolonged PR interval
>- 2nd Degree: Prolonged or Fixed PR with missing QRS complex
>- 3rd Degree: P wave not related to QRS; also known as complete heart block
>
>ST segment changes include:
>- ST elevation is found in myocardial infarction
>- ST depression is found in ischemia or angina

What is the drug of choice in a patient with symptomatic 2 degree Mobitz 2 AV block?
1. Epinephrine
2. Atropine
3. Adenosine
4. Amiodarone
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization
>Atropine is the drug of choice for bradycardia. Epinephrine is mainly used for anaphylaxis, asystole, and cardiac arrest. Adenosine is used for supraventricular tachycardia. Amnioderone is used for ventricular tachycardia with pulse.

A 54-year-old patient was admitted with MI, the nurse remembers that the blood test most indicative of cardiac damage is:
1. Leukocytosis
2. Troponin I
3. CKMM
4. CBC
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization
>Troponin I is the characteristic finding for MI. Leukocytosis is found in infections, CKMM is the result for muscle destruction. CKBB is for the brain, and CKMB is for the heart.

A client with pericarditis should be monitored for:
1. Hypovolemic shock
2. Myocardial infarction
3. Tamponade signs
4. Pneumonia
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization
>the patient should be checked for tamponade signs. The type of shock related to pericarditis is cardiogenic shick. Myocardial infarction is not related to pericarditis.

From an ECG reading, P waves represent:
1. Ventricular depolarization
2. End of ventricular depolarization
3. Ventricular repolarization
4. Atrial depolarization
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization
>The initial pulse sent by the SA node leads to the atrial contraction (depolarization), found as the P-wave. Ventricular contraction (depolarization) is found as the QRS complex. Ventricular relaxation (repolarization) is seen as the T wave.

Which of the following statements by Mr. Z to the nurse indicates a risk factor for CAD?
1. "My sister had history of endocarditis."
2. My total cholesterol is 187 mg/dL
3. My HDL level is 12 mg/dL
4. I exercise thrice a week only
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization
>HDL levels should be greater than 40 mg/dL. Risk factors for CAD include: race, age, gender, smoking, high cholesterol, hypertension, obesity, and diabetes mellitus. The same risk factors apply to stroke and atherosclerosis.

Which of the following represents myocardial ischemia?
1. ST depression
2. ST segment elevation
3. Prolonged PR interval
4. Absent P wave
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization
>ST depression occurs in myocardial ischemia. ST elevation is found in MI, Prolonged PR is found in heart black, and an absent P wave is found in atrial fibrillation.

Which of the following presentations of angina mimics MI?
1. Anginal pain that does not produce clenching of the fists over the chest
2. Anginal pain radiates to the left arm
3. Anginal pain that usually lasts only 3 to 5 minutes
4. Anginal pain that is usually relieved by rest
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization
>Anginal pain that radiates to the left arm. If relieved by rest and lasts for only 3 to 5 minutes, it represents stable and variant angina.

You have given streptokinase for a patient as prescribed by the physician. The reason for this is related to?
1. To dissolve blood clot
2. To prevent blood clot
3. Prevent bleeding
4. To reduce heart work
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization
>Streptokinase is a type of thrombolytic that dissolves blood clots.

Atherosclerosis may produce:
1. Inflammation of the endocardium
2. Plaque that obstructs the artery
3. May increase the risk of VHD
4. Plaque that obstructs the artery
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization
>atherosclerosis is a plaque that obstructs the artery.

Which of the following hemodynamic monitoring methods would you expect to be placed to monitor pressure at the right side of the heart?
1. Central Venous Pressure Catheter
2. Swan Ganz Catheter
3. Pulmonary Artery Catheter
4. Coronary Stent
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization
>Options 2 and 3 are the same. Option 4 is used for angioplasty.
>- (mn. PLS) Pulmonary Artery Catheter that measures the Left side of the heart. It uses a Swan Ganz Catheter. It enters through a vein.
>- (mn. CR) Central venous pressure monitoring measures the Right side of the heart. It monitoring fluid volume status. Euvolemia is 2 to 8 cm H<sub>2</sub>O or 2 to 6 mm Hg. If below, it indicates hypovolemia, and above indicates hypervolemia. It enters through the external jugular, antecubital, or femoral vein into the vena cava just above or within the right atrium.
>- Pulmonary capillary wedge pressure is an alternative for measuring the pressure in the left artery. It enters through the subclavian, jugular, or femoral vein through a sheath.

The Swan Ganz catheter:
1. Evaluates intra-arterial BP
2. Evaluates myocardial ischemia
3. Provides information about pulmonary resistance
4. Monitors ejection fraction of the heart
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization
>Swan ganz catheter measures volume status. It allows for direct measurement of CVP, pulmonary artery, and PCWPs; pulmonary resistance.
>- Intra-aterial BP measuring is used in criticall ill patients with severe hypertension or hypotension. It obtains direct and continuous blood pressure measurements.
>- Thallium scanning is used for myocardial ischemia.

Which of the following nursing assessments indicates right ventricular failure in a client?
1. Paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea
2. Pink, frothy sputum
3. Icteresia
4. Decrease oliguria
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization
>Icteresia (jaundice) is a sign of right-sided failure. Options 1, 2 and 3 are found in left-sided heart failure.

A low fat, low salt diet is prescribed upon discharge to the client who had heart failure. Which is a good food selection for this diet?
1. Fruit slices
2. Yogurt with meat
3. Cheese and macaroni salad
4. Half chicken salad sandwich
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization
>Option 1. Option 2 contains fat. Option 3 is salty. Option 4 has fat.

A client with heart failure is receiving digoxin. Which parameter should be checked prior to administering digoxin?
1. Respiratory rate
2. Blood pressure
3. Apical pulse
4. Heart rate
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization
>Digoxin results in decreased heart rate. Check the patient's apical pulse prior to administering digoxin.

A client with heart failure starts to complain of seeing green halos around lights. You review his medications and determines this is mostly caused by a high level of:
1. Furosemide
2. Metoprolol
3. Captopril
4. Digoxin
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization
>Digoxin can produce ocular changes when toxic levels are reached. Managing toxicity requires controlled potassium levels, and a maintenance of a therapeutic dose of 0.5 to 2 ng/mL. Hypokalemia results in ocular disturbance (green halos)

Which of the following nursing assessments is associated with left-sided heart failure?
1. Paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea
2. Hepatomegaly
3. Jaundice
4. Crackles
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization
>Hepatomegaly and jaundice appear in right-sided heart failure. Both A and D are correct.

Which of the following is true for thrombolytics?
1. A piece of internal mammary artery is used to bypass the blocked section of artery
2. A clot dissolving drug is administered through IV
3. A catheter is placed next to the plaque blocking artery, then a balloon is inflated to crush the plaque.
4. A tiny rotating blade is used to scrape off plaque that is blocking an artery.
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization
>A thrombolytic dissolves blood clots. Option 1 is a Coronary Artery Bypass Graft (CABG) surgery. This surgery does uses a saphenous vein, radial artery, or IMA. Option 3 is an angioplasty. Option 4 is

The nurse is aware that the treatment for supraventricular tachycardia includes:
1. Epinephrine
2. Adenosine
3. Dopamine
4. Atropine
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization
>Adenosine is used for SVT.

The nurse is aware that asking the patient to cough may be done in patients with:
1. Ventricular fibrillation
2. Atrial fibrillation
3. Ventricular tachycardia
4. Supraventricular tachycardia
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization
>SVT patients may be asked to cough. V-Fib requires CPR and defibrillation. A-Fib requires digoxin. V-Tach with pulse requires Amiodarone, and without pulse, requires defibrillation.
>- In SVT, check the patient's blood pressure. If BP is <90 systolic pressure, it is unstable SVT. If greater, it is stable SVT.
>- Unstable SVT: cardioversion at 50J. Sedation is required. 
>- Stable SVT: do the vagal maneuver; ask the patient to cough. A carotid massage may be performed, but necessitates palpation of the carotid artery. If a thrombus is present, a massage may cause a stroke. This maneuver should reduce the tachycardia. If ineffective, adenosine is used.

Which of the following medication below will the nurse expect to be given for a patient with wide QRS ECG, with pulse?
1. Atropine
2. Amiodarone
3. Digoxin
4. Adenosine
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization
>A wide QRS (premature ventricular contraction; PVC, >3 PVC = V-Tach) with pulse is treated with Amiodarone. If pulse is not present, initiate CPR. Atropine is used for bradycardia. Digoxin is used for heart failure. Adenosine is used for supraventricular tachycardia.

The client has experienced cardiac arrest and the nurse is performing CPR. The correct position of the nurse hand on the client's chest is?
1. Over the xiphoid process and upper half of the sternum
2. Over lower half of the sternum
3. Three finger-widths below the sternal notch
4. Two finger-widths above the sternal angle
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization
>over the lower half of the sternum.

During a cardioversion attempt, which strategy improves safety?
1. Checking the RR of the patient
2. Blood pressure monitoring
3. A verbal and visual check of "All Clear"
4. Stand in alignment with the bed while administering shock
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization
>A verbal and visual check of "All Clear". Cardioversion is an elective procedure where the patient is sedated (often with Diazepam). In an emergency, Defibrillation is done.
>- Cardioversion: elective; synchronous; atrial or ventricular unstable tachy-arrhythmias
>- Defibrillation: emergent; asynchronous; ventricular arrhythmias; used ONLY for V-Tach w/o Pulse and Ventricular Fibrillation

Based on the knowledge of the nurse about coronary blood flow, the coronary arteries receive blood flow during:
1. Inspiration
2. Expiration
3. Systole
4. Diastole
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization
>During relaxation, blood is free to flow to the coronary arteries. The answer is during diastole.

On an ECG tracing of a patient with ischemia, which would most likely initially present?
1. Wide QRS complex: PVC, V-Tach
2. ST depression: Ischemia
3. Absent P wave: Atrial Fibrillation
4. Peaked T wave: Hyperkalemia
Rationalization: 

As the client being assessed, the nurse is aware that the earliest sign of shock is:
1. Decreased urine output
2. Presence of S4
3. Cyanosis
4. Altered level of consciousness
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization
>the level of consciousness of one of the most quickly-affected functions due to decreased perfusion.

The nurse plans the care of the client with cardiac tamponade, knowing that the initial goal for it is:
1. Correct hypertension
2. Improve ventricular filling
3. Correct arrhythmia
4. Prevent infarction of the tissue
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization
>The tamponade is restricting the ventricles; an initial goal would be to improve ventricular filling.

Which of the following conditions may result in endocarditis?
1. Recurrent dental abscess
2. Alcoholism
3. Smoking
4. Low HDL levels
Rationalization: 

Which of the following medications will the nurse anticipate to be given to a cilent with symptomatic bradycardia?
	- Adenosine
	- Amiodarone
	- Atropine
	- Metoprolol
Rationalization: 

The client with chronic kidney disease was discharged after three days of admission from pyelonephritis. He was prescribed with Epogen and Bicarbonate. Which of the following would be expected as their lab values when the admitted?
1. pH 7.32, pCO<sub>2</sub> 19, HCO<sub>3</sub> 19
2. pH 7.43, pCO<sub>2</sub> 31, K<sup>+</sup> 4.4
3. WBC 5.0, K<sup>+</sup> 5.3, Hgb 19
4. pH 7.16, paCO<sub>2</sub> 54, Na<sup>+</sup> 135
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization
>a patient with CKD is expected to show metabolic acidosis. Option 1 reflects metabolic acidosis, where pH is low and pCO<sub>2</sub> is low (higher CO<sub>2</sub> means it is the cause of acidosis; since that's not the case, these findings would not be respiratory).

The nurse has the following patients for triage; who is placed on a yellow tag?
1. A 54-year-old client with ST elevation
2. A 32-year-old client with cystitis for 2 days admitted with WBC of 12,000
3. A 67-year-old elderly client with a history of 2 days loose bowel movement
4. A 46-year-old obese client admitted for supraventricular tachycardia 48 hours ago
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization
>The only client who may require admission from these is the 67-year-old client with loose bowel movement.

Which of the following nursing diagnoses would you select as being appropriate for an obese patient with reduced exercise tolerance?
1. Fluid volume deficit
2. Ineffective airway clearance
3. Impaired gas exchange
4. Altered cardiac output: decreased
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization
>The patient is displaying signs of heart failure. An appropriate nursing diagnosis would be of altered cardiac output: decreased.

Friction rub assessment in clients with pericarditis involves:
1. Auscultation of the chest
2. Percussion
3. Palpation of the point of maximal impulse
4. Auscultation of the heart
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization (inc)
>

The nurse has noted a serum sodium level of 112 mEq/L for a patient with a head injury. They are planning to institute seizure precautions for a client who is being admitted from the emergency department. Which of the following measures would the nurse not include in planning for the client's safety?
1. Padding the side rails of the bed
2. Storing a padded tongue blade at the head of the bed
3. Placing an airway, oxygen, and suction equipment at bedside
4. Having intravenous equipment ready for insertion of an intravenous catheter
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization (inc)
>

Which of the following should be at the bedside when the ECG of a 62-year-old male admitted at the coronary care unit displays a heart rate of 43?
1. Adenosine
2. Atropine
3. Epinephrine
4. Levophed
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization
>Atropine, an anticholinergic, is the drug of choice for bradycardia.

Which of the following is an appropriate nursing diagnosis for a client with cholelithiasis?
1. Potential for fluid excess
2. Pain
3. Ineffective breathing pattern
4. Imbalanced nutrition: less than body requirements
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization
>The most important nursing diagnosis for a patient with gallstones is pain detected at the left upper quadrant of the abdomen.

A patient with ascites from chronic hepatitis B is scheduled for a paracentesis. What is the best patient preparation instruction before the procedure?
1. Avoid high residue diet prior to the procedure.
2. Empty bladder prior to the procedure.
3. Do not eat anything for 12 hours before the test.
4. Avoid stimulants and alcohol for 24 to 48 hours before the test.
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization (inc)
>

Which priority nursing diagnosis is appropriate for a 32-year-old client with a random blood sugar reading of 400 mg/dL?
1. Risk for social isolation
2. Fluid volume deficit
3. Imbalanced nutrition more than body requirements
4. Altered bowel movement
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization (inc)
>

A 54-year-old male with portal hypertension that developed coffee ground vomitus  has been placed on NGT for:
1. Provision of enteral feeding
2. Decompression
3. Monitor bleeding episodes
4. Establishing an enteric medicine route
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization (inc)
>

Mr. A with diabetes mellitus was admitted due to a 50% TBSA 2nd degree burn wound. Which of these signs and symptoms is specifically observed in the client?
1. Red, dry, blanching skin
2. White, painless wound
3. Blistered, weeping wound
4. Erythema around the burn area
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization (inc)
>

To guide you in your assessment of the client's corneal reflex, which item will you utilize?
1. Penlight
2. Snellen's chart
3. Cotton
4. All of the above
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization (inc)
>

The Trigeminal nerve (CN V) affects which of the following?
1. Eye movement
2. Pupil response
3. Sight
4. Corneal reflex

>[!FAQ]- Rationalization (inc)
>

A client is using a sealed source of radiation therapy for cancer. Which of the following is an important measure?
1. Limiting the visitor's time with the client to less than 60 minutes in a day.
2. Keeping a lead-line container and long forceps in the client's room.
3. Instructing visitors to maintain a distance of about 4 feet from the client.
4. Reminding the client to flush the toilet several times after each use.

>[!FAQ]- Rationalization (inc)
>

A client on chemotherapy had a tumor lysis syndrome. The nurse understands that appropriate nursing care for this client would include:
1. Reducing the intake of vitamin A for oral replacement.
2. Handling the client gently to prevent pathologic fractures.
3. Limiting fluid intake.
4. Administering an antiemetic as ordered to reduce the syndrome.

>[!FAQ]- Rationalization (inc)
>

A client has a WBC count of 6, and a platelet count of 120. Which measure is appropriate?
1. Advise the client avoid flossing their teeth before and after meals.
2. Encourage the client to rinse their mouth with saline every 1 to 2 hours while awake.
3. Keep the client on a low-fiber diet.
4. Limiting visitors every day.

>[!FAQ]- Rationalization (inc)
>

An LF on chemotherapy should have which of the following measures implemented?
1. Place the client on enteric isolation
2. Advise to have low fiber diet
3. Limit hydration
4. Encourage eating fresh fruits and vegetables

>[!FAQ]- Rationalization (inc)
>

If the client finds a reading of 9 mg/dL during chemotherapy, the appropriate nursing diagnosis is:
1. Risk of infection
2. Risk of aspiration
3. Risk of bleeding
4. Risk of falls

>[!FAQ]- Rationalization (inc)
>

Which of the following symptoms usually occurs in early multiple sclerosis?
1. Diplopia
2. Tremor and shuffling gait
3. Ascending paralysis
4. Recent memory loss

>[!FAQ]- Rationalization (inc)
>

Which of the following measures would be avoided in teaching for Kurt with multiple sclerosis to avoid an exacerbation of the disease?
1. Patching the affected eye
2. Providing a diet as tolerated
3. Taking hot baths for relaxation
4. All of the above

>[!FAQ]- Rationalization (inc)
>

Which of the following statements is true of myasthenia gravis?
1. A myasthenic crisis is caused by overmedication of anticholinesterases
2. A cholinergic crisis is caused by under medication of anticholinesterases
3. Atropine is the antidote for Tensilon Test
4. An electromyographic confirmation of the diagnosis of myasthenia gravis

>[!FAQ]- Rationalization (inc)
>

Which of the following nursing actions is initial in caring for an acute asthma attack?
1. Place him on orthopneic position
2. Stay with him at the bedside
3. Anticipate an ABG order
4. Administer albuterol nebulization

>[!FAQ]- Rationalization (inc)
>

Which of these drugs are a bronchodilator?
1. Montelukast
2. Hydrocortisone
3. Albuterol
4. Prednisone

>[!FAQ]- Rationalization (inc)
>

A nurse assesses the water seal camber of a closed chest drainage system and notes fluctuations in the chamber. This indicates that:
1. An air leak is present.
2. The tubing is kinked.
3. The lung has re-expanded.
4. The system is functioning as expected.

>[!FAQ]- Rationalization (inc)
>

Four hours ago, a chest tube connected to a closed water seal system was placed on a patient with tension pneumothorax. Which assessment finding should be reported immediately?
1. There is intermittent bubbling in the water seal chamber
2. There is continuous bubbling in the water seal chamber
3. There is serosanguinous drainage in the collection chamber
4. There is no subcutaneous emphysema in the affected lung

>[!FAQ]- Rationalization (inc)
>

The nurse understands that DPT immunization will provide:
1. Natural immunity
2. Acquired immunity
3. Innate immunity
4. Passive immunity
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization (inc)
>

A 67-year-old client with left ventricular failure has been taking furosemide (Lasix) and was just started on digoxin (Lanoxin). The nurse must check the client's most recent:
1. Digoxin level
2. Sodium level
3. Potassium level
4. Creatinine level
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization (inc)
>

A nurse is teaching a client how to mix regular insulin and NPH insulin in the same syringe. Which of the following actions, if performed by the client, indicates the need for further teaching?
1. Reads the NPH insulin vial
2. Withdraws the NPH insulin first
3. Gently rolls the vial between their palms
4. Withdraws the regular insulin first
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization (inc)
>

A nurse has given a client taking ethambutol information about the medication. The client understands the instructions if the client states to immediately report:
1. Tingling sensations
2. Difficulty in differentiating red and green colors
3. Impaired sense of hearing
4. Orange-red discoloration of body secretions
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization (inc)
>

A client on Digoxin has a serum potassium level of 2.7 mEq/L and is complaining of anorexia. What is the therapeutic serum level of digitalis?
1. 0.5 to 2.0 ng/mL
2. 1.2 to 2.8 ng/mL
3. 3.0 ng/mL
4. 3.5 ng/mL
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization (inc)
>

Which clinical findings would the nurse most likely note during an Addisonian crisis?
1. Serum potassium level of 3.2 mEq/L, BP of 150/80
2. Serum potassium level of 5.9 mEq/L, BP of 70/50
3. Serum sodium level of 150 mEq/L, BP of 160/70
4. Serum sodium level of 135 mEq/L, BP of 60/40
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization (inc)
>

The nurse's immediate action for a client with a COPD exacerbation would be?
1. Suctioning the client's secretions
2. Place the client in a high fowler's position
3. Begin assembling medications that will be given
4. Call the respiratory therapy department for a ventilator
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization (inc)
>

What early symptom would the nurse ask for a male client with UTI?
1. Dysuria
2. Nocturia
3. Decreased force in the urine stream
4. Flank pain
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization (inc)
>

A client with chronic kidney disease secondary to diabetic nephropathy is on dialysis. Which indicators would the nurse use to evaluate the client's status post-dialysis?
1. Potassium level and sodium
2. BUN and creatinine level
3. Vital signs and urine output
4. Vital signs and weight
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization (inc)
>

Tonometry is used for a client with glaucoma. The nurse remembers that the normal intraocular pressure is:
1.  2 to 7 mm Hg
2. 8 to 21 mm Hg
3. 22 to 30 mm Hg
4. 31 to 35 mm Hg
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization (inc)
>

A client is scheduled for enoxaparin therapy. Based on the client history, which would be an absolute indication for this medication?
1. Hypertension
2. Peripheral arterial disease
3. Heart failure
4. Prosthetic valve replacement
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization (inc)
>

A 28-year-old female had a lumbar puncture for CSF analysis. The nurse would place the client in which position for the procedure?
1. Side-lying with legs pulled up and head bent down onto chest
2. Side-lying with a pillow under the hip
3. Elevated at 30 degrees
4. Flat on bed
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization (inc)
>

A client has just undergone intravenous pyelography. Which would be an appropriate post-procedure care instruction?
1. Eat lightly during the day
2. Rest and keep your feet dangling
3. Hold medications for at least 4 hours
4. Force fluids for the day
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization (inc)
>

The nurse assesses a client with a tentative diagnosis of emphysema. Which of the following distinguishes emphysema from asthma?
1. Copious sputum with an increased anteroposterior diameter of the chest
2. Distended neck vein with crackles
3. Minimal weight loss
4. Cough lasing 2 months for 3 years
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization (inc)
>

Which nursing action is the most appropriate when planning to obtain a sputum specimen?
1. Provide the client with generous fluid intake
2. Encourage the client to change positions regularly
3. Ask the dietitian to send the client a clear liquid diet
4. Administer an antitussive prior to collecting the specimen
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization (inc)
>

Which drug is used when there is symptomatic bradycardia?
1. Atropine
2. Epinephrine
3. Adenosine
4. Amiodarone
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization (inc)
>

Which diagnostic examination is most appropriate for dengue fever?
1. Peripheral blood smear
2. RT-PCR
3. Bone marrow biopsy
4. Epogen injection
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization (inc)
>

What is the nursing management for a client with azotemia?
1. Dietary management
2. Recreation therapy
3. Blood transfusion
4. Epogen injection
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization (inc)
>

With which of these should you keenly observer in a client on anticoagulants?
1. Developing rashes
2. Developing systemic fungal infection
3. Developing petechiae
4. Developing fever blister
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization (inc)
>\

A client who underwent modified radical mastectomy on the right is brough to the recovery room. Which is an essential nursing action?
1. Wrapping the right arm with the blood pressure cuff
2. Allowing the patient to stay on bed rest for 48 hours
3. Elevating the right arm
4. Allowing the affected leg to dangle
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization (inc)
>

Which of the following arterial blood gas results would be found in vomiting?
1. pH 7.32, pCO<sub>2</sub> 45, HCO<sub>3</sub> 17, pO<sub>2</sub> 90
2. pH 7.46, pCO<sub>2</sub> 30, HCO<sub>3</sub> 29, pO<sub>2</sub> 80
3. pH 7.31, pCO<sub>2</sub> 55, HCO<sub>3</sub> 22, pO<sub>2</sub> 50
4. pH 7.47, pCO<sub>2</sub> 40, HCO<sub>3</sub> 36, pO<sub>2</sub> 78
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization (inc)
>

The nurse ensures this medication is ready for a client on warfarin:
1. Vitamin K (Aquamephyton)
2. Digibind
3. Enoxaparin
4. Protamine Sulfate
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization (inc)
>

Several patients are admitted from a vehicular accident. Which of the following is assessed in a patient with an increased ICP?
1. Increasing temperature, pulse, respirations, and decreasing blood pressure
2. Increasing temperature, blood pressure, and decreasing pulse and respiration
3. Decreasing temperature, pulse, blood pressure, and increasing respirations
4. Decreasing temperature, respirations, and increasing pulse and blood pressure
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization (inc)
>

A 30-year-old is treated in the emergency room for a fractures left ankle. Which instructing the client for ambulating with crutches, the nurse most appropriate teaches the client to:
1. Place the crutches under the arms, bear weight on the axilla, and position both crutches 8 to 10 inches in front of the body
2. Move the right foot and left crutch together, then the left foot and right crutch
3. Move crutches and feet in the following sequence: right crutch, left foot, left crutch, right foot
4. Move both crutches and the left foot forward simultaneously, followed by the right foot
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization (inc)
>

Basic principles in the management of patients with osteoarthritis include:
1. Activity with joint splinting
2. Rest and pain relief
3. Antiinflammatory drugs with dietary modifications
4. Alternating heat and cold treatments
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization (inc)
>

A patient with rheumatoid arthritis is taking NSAIDs. They should be observed for:
1. Gastritis
2. Inflammatory Bowel Disease
3. Urinary Tract Infection
4. Hearing Loss
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization (inc)
>

The pathophysiology of osteoarthritis is characterized by:
1. Degeneration of the articular cartilage
2. Spur formation at the joint surfaces
3. Infection of the endosteal bone
4. Inflammation of the synovium
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization (inc)
>

What would be the primary goal for a client with Endocarditis?
1. Improve respiratory rate
2. Decrease exercise tolerance
3. Prevent heart failure
4. Decrease peripheral edema
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization (inc)
>

Hypertension is defined as persistently elevated systolic and diastolic pressure above:
1. 170/100
2. 200/80
3. 140/90
4. 170/90
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization (inc)
>

A 56-year-old client is receiving digoxin (Lanoxin) following discharge. The nurse should be primarily concerned with:
1. Assessing the client for changes in urine output and planning activity at home based on tolerance
2. Observing the client for the return of and for adverse effects of the drug
3. Monitoring appetite and encouraging gradual increase in activities of daily living
4. Taking the apical pulse before drug administration and teaching the client how to count the pulse rate
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization (inc)
>

All of the following present changes in an ECG, except:
1. Liver failure
2. Kidney failure
3. Electrolyte imbalance
4. Hypoparathyroidism
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization (inc)
>

Which ECG aspect would be altered in a heart block?
1. T wave
2. PR interval
3. QRS complex
4. P wave
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization (inc)
>

The nurse identifies which medication to be a vasodilator to have an adverse effect of coughing:
1. ACE Inhibitors
2. Morphine sulfate
3. Nitroglycerin
4. Beta blockers
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization (inc)
>

During a life-threatening arrythmia such as ventricular tachycardia, the nurse keeps which of the following in mind:
1. Checking the patient's pulse
2. Time when the client loses consciousness
3. To ask the client's medication chart
4. To check the latest urine output of the client
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization (inc)
>

In reducing the risk of endocarditis, good dental care is an important measure. To promote good dental care in clients with tricuspid regurgitation, the teaching plan includes the proper use of:
1. Firm toothbrush
2. Electric toothbrush
3. Dental floss
4. Alcohol-based mouthwash
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization (inc)
>

During the first several hours of chest tube thoracostomy insertion, it would be most essential for the nurse to:
1. Frequently monitor the client's apical pulse and blood pressure
2. Monitor the client's respiratory rate every hour
3. Elevate the client's bed at forty-five degrees
4. Instruct the client to cough and perform deep breathing exercises every 2 hours
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization (inc)
>

A 22-year-old client with dry oral mucosa is admitted to the emergency room. She has tachycardia and pale skin. Which step in the nursing process is demonstrated in this scenario?
1. Planning
2. Analysis
3. Implementation
4. Evaluation
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization (inc)
>

A client with endocarditis should be closely monitored for which complication of valve replacement?
1. Hypertension
2. Cardiomyopathy
3. Cardiac tamponade
4. Thrombophlebitis
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization (inc)
>

A client has been diagnosed with stage 2 hypertension. The priority nursing diagnosis would be:
1. Pain
2. Impaired skin integrity
3. Deficient fluid volume
4. Ineffective health maintenance
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization (inc)
>

A patient is hospitalized following myocardial infarction. He inquires about why Atorvastatin is prescribed. The nurse explains that the medication:
1. Helps prevent arrythmias of the heart
2. Dilates coronary blood vessels
3. Encourages bed rest and passive ROM
4. Encourages deep breathing and coughing exercises
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization (inc)
>

A nurse teaches the client with angina about the common expected side effects of nitroglycerin including:
1. Hypertension
2. Headache
3. Rashes
4. Increased urine output
>[!FAQ]- Rationalization (inc)
>