---
tags:
  - CHN
title: CHN D2
---
As discussed by **Ma'am Aida V. Garcia, RN, MAN**
___
# Demography
The study of the population, entailing not only the size, but the composition and distribution as well. Some sources of demographic data include:
1. **Census**: either **de jure** (actual residence), or **de facto** (based on where the individual is currently situated) performed by the National Government. It is the most expensive form of data collection in terms of both money and time (done every 10 years).
2. **Registration System**: records of vital events e.g. birth certificate, death certificate
	- Births should be reported within 30 days by the birth attendant or who birthed the child to the local civil registry.
	- Deaths%%incomplete%%. In terms of location to register, this should be done where the death had occurred. The certificate should be signed by the municipal health officer.
3. **Sample Survey**: selecting a small subset of the community in order to represent the entire community.
## Population Size
In the Philippines, the global population is increasing by 1.6% (2020). In general, this change is based on **absolute increase**; calculated by deducting deaths from births. The same represented in percentage is called the **relative increase**.
- The age group with the most births is the 25 to 29 year old bracket of women.
- The total fertility rate includes all women from 15 to 49 years old who are still within the reproductive age. As of 2022, the amount of children per woman is 1.9.
- **Crude Birth Rate** (CBR) is the rate of births. The inversion is **Crude Death Rate** (CDR), the rate of death. The *rate of natural increase* is $\text{CBR}-\text{CDR}$.
- The most common cause of mortality is **lifestyle**; the most common cause of morbidity is **infection**.

The population may also be denoted based on its composition, a primary example being of its *gender*. This is calculated with the **sex ratio**:
$$\text{Sex Ratio}=\frac{\text{Males}}{\text{Females}\times100}$$

Composition may also be represented by age. The **median age** denotes the middle point of age in the population. Others include:
- The **Dependency Ratio**: the number of people who are *economically dependent* (unemployed, not employable; 0 to 14 years old, 65 years old and above) or *economically independent* (able to work; 15 to 64 years old).
$$\text{Dependency Ratio}=\frac{\text{Dependent}}{\text{Independent}}\times100$$

The representation of both **age** and **sex** with one graph utilizes the **population pyramid graph**.
%%Image of population pyramid%%

The **geographical and housing distribution** of the population can be quantified through the following:
1. **Urban-Rural Distribution**: the distribution of the population between urban and rural areas.
2. **Crowding Index**: number of individuals per room in a household. Exceeding two indicates increased risk, especially for communicable diseases.
3. **Population Density**: number of individuals within a given area (per km²).
___
# Field Health Services and Information System (FHSIS)
1. **Individual Treatment Record** (ITR): the foundation or primary building block of FHSIS. It is a basic patient consultation record or a bond paper which bears the date, name, address, height, weight, chief complaint, and presenting signs and symptoms, the diagnosis (if available), treatment, and date of treatment of each family member who consulted in the health center.
2. **Target Client List** (TCL): the secondary building block of FHSIS. It reflects the list of "target" or eligible clients or individuals for a particular health program. It facilitates the monitoring and supervision of service delivery activities and determines the patient's compliance to a particular program.
3. **Summary Table**: a 12-month table filled on a monthly basis to tally the number of clients in the barangay health facility in terms of **health program accomplishments** and **morbidity diseases**.
4. **Monthly Consolidation Table**: a form filled up by the PHN to put together the data reported by all midwives of the city or municipality. It is an essential form and serves as an output table of the RHU because it consists of the reported data per indicator by each Barangay Health Station or public health midwife.
## Reporting Forms
There are monthly reports:
1. **Program Report** (M1)
2. **Morbidity Report** (M2)

Quarterly reports:
1. **Program Report** (Q1)
2. **Morbidity Report** (Q2)

and Annual reports:
The Annual Form 1 (A1) consists of data and indicators needed only on a yearly basis on demographic, environmental, natality, and mortality. Annual Form 2 (A2) is the report enlisting all the diseases which have occurred in a city or municipality over the year according to age and sex. Lastly, Annual Form 3 (A3) reports all mortality cases or deaths in a municipality over the year according to to age and sex.
___
# Family Forms and Structures

Families are a group of (two or more) persons that live together with a recognized head bounded together by blood, marriage, emotion, adoption, or law. Families may be categorized based on the members included:
1. **Dyad**: a couple with no children.
2. **Cohabitating**: unmarried (except for common law) couple living together.
3. **Nuclear**: a couple with their children, even if adopted.
4. **Extended**: at least three generations are included in one family.
5. **Compound**: multiple spouses; only legal based on PD 1083 for Muslims.
6. **Blended**: a mother or father whose child or children is from a previous marriage or arrangement.
7. **Single Parent**: the highest-risk family, where only one parent supports the children.
8. **Gay/Lesbian Family**: these are families with parents of the same sex, with or without their own children. There is no legal marriage in these families because of the EO 209 "Family Code".

Based on Authority:
1. **Patriarchal**
2. **Matriarchal**
3. **Matricentric**
4. **Patricentric**

Based on Location:
1. **Patrilocal**
2. **Matrilocal**
3. **Neo-Local**: living independent of either side

Based on Lineage:
1. **Patrilineal**
2. **Matrilineal**

Based on Amount of Partners:
1. **Monogamous**: one husband with one wife.
2. **Polygamous**: a husband with multiple wives. Commonly found among Muslims in Saudi Arabia.
3. **Polyanhydrous**: a wife with multiple husbands. Commonly found in the Todas of Southern India.
## Functions of the Family
1. **Procreation**: the universally accepted institution for reproductive function and child rearing.
2. **Socialization of Family Members**: the family creates the foundation for how its children becomes productive members of society. It involves the transmission of culture from the parents to their children.
3. **Physical Maintenance**: the provision of basic needs for its dependent members.
4. **Economic Function**: the family serves as a basic unit of economic production (rural families producing goods) or economic consumption (urban families earning salaries or wages)
5. **Welfare and Protection**: the family provides compansionship and meets affective, sexual, socioeconomic, and emotional gratification. The family is a source of motivation and morale for its members.
6. **Status Placement**: the family confers its societal rank on the children. With social mobility, the family may shift between social classes.
## Family Assessment Tools
1. **Family Health Tree**: based on the genogram, it provides a mechanism for recording the family's medical and health histories.
	- Causes of death
	- Genetically linked diseases e.g. heart disease, cancer, diabetes, hypertension, allergies, asthma, and mental retardation.
	- Environmental and Occupational Diseases
	- Infectious diseases
	- Psychosocial problems
	- Familial risk factors
	- Risk factors related to the family's methods of illness prevention
	- Lifestyle-related risk factors
2. **Genogram**: illustration of the family relationships
3. **Ecomap**
4. **Cultugram**
5. **Interviewing**: the use of a standardized tool (family service and progress report) to conceptualize the health needs of the families and to assess families' responses to events such as birth, retirement, or chronic illness.
	- **Manners**: greetings, privacy, confidentiality
	- **Therapeutic Questions and Conversation**: focus on problems and sharing information, and utilize listening and encourage questions.
	- Family Genogram (and Ecomap when indicated)
	- **Commend the family** on at least two strength areas to develop rapport.
## Developmental Stages of the Family
1. **Marriage**: joining of families; the formation of an identity as a couple, and inclusion of the spouse in realignment of relationships with extended families.
	- Developmental task: establish a mutually satisfying married life.
2. **Families with young children**: children at an oldest age of 12. Problems arise with who is to take care of the children; the integration of children into the family unit, adjustment of tasks for child-reading, financial, and household; accommodation of new parenting and grandparenting roles.
	- Developmental task: adjust to infants and encourage their development
3. **Families with adolescents**: development of increasing autonomy for adolescents; midlife reexamination of marital and career issues. This is the initial shift towards concern for the older generation.
	- Developmental task: balancing freedom with responsibility as teens.
4. **Families as launching centers**: establishment of independent identities for parents and grown children; renegotiation of marital relationship, readjustment of  relationships to include in-laws of older generations
	- Developmental task: assisting young adults to work, attend school, marriage, etc.
5. **Aging families**: maintaining couple and individual functioning while adapting to the aging process, supporting role of the middle generation, supporting and autonomy of the older generation, and the preparation for their own death and dealing with the loss of spouse and/or siblings and other peers.
## Characteristics of a Health Family
1. Able to **communicate and listen repeatedly in many contexts**
2. Able to **establish priorities and family needs**
3. **Affirms, supports, and respects each other**
4. Members engage in **flexible role relationships**, share power, respond to change, support growth and autonomy, and decision-making
5. Teaches **family and societal values and beliefs**, sharing a spiritual core
6. Fostering **responsibility** and values **service to others**
7. Has **a sense of play and humor** and shares leisure time
8. Able to ability to **cope with stress and crisis and grow from problems**
