---
tags:
  - CMPA
  - A113
  - INC
title: Fundamentals of Nursing
---
(c) Madame Toni
___
# Module 1: Medication Administration
The administration of medication is a **dependent nursing action**. Doctor's orders are required for any medications given.
>[!IMPORTANT] Fundamental Rule: never administer an unfamiliar medication.

## Rights of Medication
The first six rights of medication listed are most important, but otherwise not in any particular order:
1. **Right Patient**: identify the patient with at least two identifiers. For this specific right, take into consideration that there are two categories of patients: conscious and unconscious.
2. **Right Drug**
3. **Right Dose**
4. **Right Frequency**
5. **Right Route**
6. **Right Documentation**
7. **Right Client Education**
8. **Right Assessment**
9. **Right Evaluation**
10. **Right to Refuse**
>[!DRUG] Medication Order (MO) vs. Telephone Order (TO).
>A **medication order** contains the name of the patient, the name of the drug, its dose, frequency, and route; the first five rights listed, along with the signature of the prescribing physician. All elements must be present for the validity of a prescription.
>
>A **telephone order** can provide the statement of the previously stated elements, except for the presence of a **signature**.
>- However, the prescribing physician should **countersign the order** based on institutional policies, within 24 hours, or by the next shift.
>- It may also be accepted for **emergency cases**.
>- Additionally, a **registered nurse** must be present to serve as a witness and for verification of the drug. Any unclear info provided should be inquired upon, such as the spelling of an uncommon drug.
