Our WiFi was still dead this morning. I woke up as scheduled (but I would still be late to the meeting by about fifteen minutes). I've lost the drive to maintain perfect punctuality for several reasons. As long as I'm not a cause of delay (which is impossible in this case because the bus would leave with or without me), I don't mind. They probably do, but what are they going to do about it? Impact my scholarship? I had a perfect attendance and it did nothing. Would having a non-perfect attendance make it worse? What's up with that? Despite that, I don't slack on any of the songs that we need to learn. I'm literally among the earliest to study and learn the songs because I make the entire group's MP3 guides for them as soon as I get our music sheets.

Anyway. We arrived, did our soundchecks, and everyone started preparing. I steamed my barong and put on some face powder. Returned to the room because people were vocalizing. As usual, I want to try vocalizing outside of my range where my form breaks down. While doing this, me and another baritone would have fun with hearing ourselves struggle. The president (two days in a row!) would say "vocalize properly". Imagine this in an unbearably annoying tone and wording in Filipino. Christ. I didn't even hear five members of the group vocalizing a few minutes after that. Am I being "improper" because I want to extend my range? I've rarely heard them struggling to hit notes. Is it because they're that good, or that they stop vocalizing when they struggle? We don't utilize our head tone or falsetto to hit our notes. We don't have that luxury when vocalizing. There's always a better way to say things. It doesn't have to be sarcasm, snark, or any other negative approaches. She should know this. She's a soon-to-be licensed professional teacher.

I left that room as soon as I could. Did the usual and watched the academic procession, talked to some staff, checked out the program, and sat around. Our conductor arrived very early this time. Maybe they spent the night nearby at some hotel. The songs continued without incident. The university hymn remained difficult, but not impossible to sing. I lose my bass quality, but I'm still happy I've gotten far enough to try and sing it without backing down and using a head tone. It's still quite difficult, but evidently as my conductor had no comments about it, it wasn't horrible or destructive for our sound.

More sitting around, eating, chatting, watching, and the day continued as usual. No more snarky remarks for that day. Maybe because I spent most of it not in the same room. She reminds me so much of my sister when she was a teenager. Absolutely unbearable.

Got home, and this time I went to class instead of straight home. We got back at 6:30 PM. Class ended at 7:15 PM. I got to collaborate with my groupmates for our activities, seeing as how I'll be mostly absent for the next coming weeks. Got home. Still no WiFi. Went to sleep soon after the usual routine.