I'm writing this two days into the future, didn't really have time to document anything when I got home on the 16th.

Late for the call time. I woke up at 4:30 AM instead of the designated 3:00 AM because I had slept late due to my mother's requests. I used public transport (surprisingly easy) to get to the Philippine International Convention Center and arrived there at around 6:30 AM. Our president would eventually use this to try and retort against me that day. Usual toxic business. The rest of the day proceeded without much incident for me except for that. She had given me an ill-toned warning about getting dressed because we were preparing to march. That tone made the cranky, sleep-deprived me more agitated than usual. Surely they were also sleep-deprived, but at least I'm not as vocal about it. Taking my polo off and putting my costume on wouldn't even have taken a minute. She hadn't even realized she wasn't wearing her proper shoes up until 2 minutes after she warned me about my uniform, after someone else pointed it out for her.

I took charge of observing the graduation ceremony in order to call the chorale for prep time, partially because I didn't want to stay in the suffocating, dimly-lit, cramped and noisy dressing room backstage. Another part is because the graduation is genuinely fun to observe, thinking about every single person walking up the stage (and making comments about them, to myself). That said, I was watching at one point but failed to realize how close the event was to finishing (playing a game with friends). I informed them later than I should have, and three of the approximately twenty-five members failed to join us in singing the graduation song. They were asleep at a couch on the upper floors.

We sang the national anthem, the graduation song, and the university hymn. I didn't have much issue with my performance for the songs, but I still struggle with maintaining form for the highest notes (up to F4 yeesh) of the university hymn. Our conductor arrived later in the day (before the end of the first batch of graduates). He was pleasant and positive with the members as usual. I wish our officers would take note of how he runs things. He can get more stern and personal than what is necessary, but he still maintains non-sarcastic constructiveness and encourages the members by showing us how we can reach our potentials.

We boarded the bus by about 5:00 PM. Got back to the campus in about an hour or two, can't really recall. I went home, cleaned myself up, and would go to sleep soon after. Our WiFi was dead, so I couldn't really entertain myself.