Still no WiFi. The problem hasn't even been identified. I'll have to make do and study instead (hopefully). Slept for twelve hours from 9:00 PM to 9:00 AM. My head hurts, but at least my body got to rest. They brought me dinner last night, but I was already asleep so I couldn't eat it. I didn't see it when I went downstairs to get breakfast. I now have two meals in the morning. It's a good departure from the fast food that has been my sustenance for the past two days. I'll review fluids and electrolytes then proceed with a few chapters of the unit I skipped, then back to unit 3. I still haven't answered the questions for that chapter. I need to learn more before I try to.

I slept for 4 more hours. I didn't have a headache after, so I think that's fine. Feel better rested. Lost time for review, but I'm finally doing it at 3:30 PM. I'm writing the questions for the Fluids and Electrolytes lesson for unit 3 of Saunders.

I got started on the Acid-Base Balance chapter of the book. It took me until night-time to do two pages. I also got sidetracked and typed out the medical-surgical nursing test that our reviewer gave us. It wasn't a bad day. Could have done more.

Parents got home at around 11:00 PM or something. Father was sick, mother was mildly neurotic (as usual). They both need to get rest. They get home that late, then wake up at 5:00 AM or earlier. It's not healthy. They always used to talk about what we'd do if they were to suddenly die. They're speeding that process up. Hopefully when they break down it's mild, and helps them realize they're not supposed to push themselves like that anymore. It's not necessary. Delegations can be made to those who should work on it (like my eldest brother, who works four? hours a day and gets half of the cut). My mother scolded me again about the utensils. She hates how I try to give her fifty pairs a day, instead of just everything at once. She even extended it to my work ethic, thinking I'm not thorough in my work and academics. That was stressful, especially while I was massaging her (she also critiqued that, again).

Watched a happy anime about highschooler romance. Lightened my mood a lot. Went to sleep while doing so. It was past midnight.