---
title: "Chapter 01: Professional Nursing Practice"
date: 2024-01-01
---
A summary of **Professional Reviewer Dr./Atty. Glenn R. Luansing**'s **Professional Nursing Practice, Ethics, and Jurisprudence**, Chapter 01: Professional Nursing Practice. "*Chapter One of this book focuses on the discussion of professional nursing practice and its challenges, with an extensive explanation on various areas of nursing practice and the inherent professional duties and accountabilities among nurses.*"
>[!CITE] 
>Luansing, G. (2023). Professional Nursing Practice. In *Professional Nursing Practice, Ethics, and Jurisprudence* (pp. 1-84). C&E Publishing. ISBN:978-971-98-1932-5.

___
# Nursing as a Profession
A **Profession** is a calling requiring specialized knowledge and intensive academic preparations. In nursing, it is the performance, for a fee or a salary, of professional services e.g. responsible nursing care, observation of symptoms, accurate reporting and documentation, supervision of others, execution of nursing procedures, and execution of valid doctor's orders. There are **seven specific characteristics of a professional nurse**.
## Accountability
The nurse is liable for any resulting act or misconduct based on the professional decisions implemented, committed, or performed. A negligent nurse may be administratively, criminally, and civilly liable based on prevailing laws.
1. **Administrative Liabilities**
	- Section 23, R.A. 9173 (**Revocation and Suspension of Certificate of Registration/Professional License and Cancellation of Special/Temporary Permit**): the Board shall have the power to revoke or suspend the certificate of registration/professional license or cancel the special/temporary permit of a nurse upon any of the following grounds:
		- For any causes mentioned in Section 22, R.A. 9173; for unprofessional and unethical conduct; for gross incompetence or serious ignorance; for malpractice or negligence in the practice of nursing; for the use of fraud, deceit, or false statements in obtaining a certificate of registration/professional license or a temporary/special permit; for violation of this Act, the rules and regulations, Code of Ethics for nurses and technical standards for nursing practice, policies of the Board and the Commission, or the conditions and limitations for the issuance of the temporary/special permit; or for practicing his/her profession during his/her suspension from such practice;
		- Provided that the **suspension shall be for a period not to exceed four (4) years**.
		- Such a suspension demands due process before an investigating authority. (*Omitted the PRC administrative hearing and investigation procedure.*)
	- Section 35, Article VIII of R.A. 9173 (**Prohibitions in the Practice of Nursing**): A fine of not less than Fifty thousand pesos (₱50,000.00) nor more than One hundred thousand pesos (₱100,000.00) or imprisonment of not less than one (1) year nor more than six (6) years, or both, upon the discretion of the court, shall be imposed upon:
		- Any person practicing nursing in the Philippines within the meaning of this Act: without proper certification (without, stolen, expired, invalid, falsely attained); who falsely poses or advertises as a registered and licensed nurse or falsely appends B.S.N./R.N. to their name; or who, as a registered and licensed nurse, abets or assists the illegal practice of a person who is not lawfully qualified to practice nursing.
		- Any person or the chief executive officer of a judicial entity who undertakes in-service educational programs or who conducts review classes for both local and foreign examination without permit/clearance from the Board and the Commission; or
		- Any persons or employer of nurses who violates the minimum base pay of nurses and the incentives and benefits that should be accorded them as specified in Sections 32 and 34; or
		- Any person or the chief executive officer of a juridical entity violating any provision of this Act and its rules and regulations.
2. **Criminal Liabilities**
	- Art. 365. of the Revised Penal Code (**Imprudence and Negligence**): Reckless imprudence consists in voluntary, but without malice, doing or failing to do an act. Simply imprudence consists in the lack of precaution displayed in those cases in which the damage to be caused is not immediate nor clearly manifest.
		- If the reckless action would have been a grave felony, *arresto mayor* in its maximum period to *prision correccional* in its medium period;
		- If the reckless action would have been a less grave felony, *arresto mayor* in its minimum and medium periods shall be imposed;
		- If the reckless action would have been a light felony, *arresto menor* in its maximum periodical shall be imposed.
		- If the simple action would have been a grave felony, *arresto mayor* in its medium and maximum periods shall be imposed.
		- If the simple action would have been a less grave felony, *arresto mayor* in its minimum period shall be imposed.
		- If the action only results in damage to the property of another, a fine equal to or up to three times such value (but not less than ₱25.00) is imposed.
		- If the simple action causes some wrong, which if done maliciously, would have constituted a light felony, a fine not exceeding two-hundred pesos (₱200.00) and censure shall be imposed.
		- A penalty next higher in degree is imposed upon offenders who fail to lend on the spot to the injured parties such help as may be in their hands to give.
3. **Civil Liabilities**
	- Art. 2176 of the New Civil Code: whoever by act or omission causes damage to another, there being fault or negligence, is obliged to pay for the damage done. Such fault or negligence, if there is no pre-existing contractual relation between the parties, is called a quasi-delict and is governed by the provisions of this Chapter.
	- Art. 2177 of the New Civil Code: responsibility for fault or negligence under the preceding article is entirely separate and distinct from the civil liability arising from negligence under the Penal Code. But the plaintiff cannot recover damages twice for the same act or omission of the defendant.
>[!EXAMPLE]
>Nurse Lolita who failed to digilently compute the right dose of a drug as ordered by the doctor to her patient named Esmeralda. As a result, the patient's condition deteriorated over the week due to drug overdose, and later on, Esmeralda died as a consequence. Nurse Lolita, as a licensed nurse practitioner, shall be accountable for the death of her patient because of failure to exercise due diligence in providing care. The surviving relatives of Esmeralda can file necessary legal actions in court and the Professional Regulation Commission to hold Nurse Lolita accountable for the resulting death. As part of her administrative liabilities, the Board of Nursing may suspend or revoke Lolita's license and certificate of registration to practice, based on the outcome of their administrative hearings and investigations conducted by an appointed committee. The basis of accountability of Nurse Lolita for a penalty of suspension or revocation is contemplated under the provisions of R.A. 9173 or the Nursing Act of 2002. On the other hand, since the death of patient Esmeralda is an outcome of a criminal act, the trial court may also render a decision for imprisonment under Article 365 of the Revised Penal Code and/or the imposition of award of damages, Article 2176 and 2177 of the New Civil Code, as her civil liabilities.

## Professional Autonomy
The nurse is able to think independently and take actions related to patient care within their scope of practice, as is defined by the existing nursing laws, Code of Ethics, and other various policies or guidelines affecting nurses. Failure of the nurse to perform their duties within limits set by law would possible expose them to various professional accountabilities as discussed in the preceding number. It is also the duty of the nurse to be ever mindful of the conduct of their colleagues that may be detrimental to the patient and profession. Section 28 of R.A. 9173 (**Scope of Nursing**) states the tasks included in the scope of nursing practice in which the nurse is allowed to perform as part of professional autonomy:
1. Nursing care during conception, labor, delivery, infancy, childhood, toddler, preschool, school age, adolescence, adulthood, and old age. Independently, nurses are primarily responsible for the promotion of health and prevention of illness. Collaboratively, nurses work with other health care providers for curative, preventive, and rehabilitative aspects of care, restoration of health, alleviation of suffering, and when recovery is not possible, towards a peaceful death. 
2. Provide nursing care through the utilization of the nursing process. 
3. Traditional and innovative approaches, therapeutic use of self, executing health care techniques and procedures, essential primary health care, comfort measures, health teachings, and administration of written prescription for treatment, therapies, oral, topical and parenteral medications, internal examination during labor in the absence of antenatal bleeding and delivery. In the case of suturing perineal laceration, special training shall be provided according to protocol established. 
4. Establish linkages with community resources and coordination with the health team. 
5. Provide health education to individuals, families, and communities. 
6. Teach, guide, and supervise students in nursing education programs, including the administration of nursing services in varied settings; undertake consultation services; engage in such activities that require the utilization of knowledge and decision-making skills of a registered nurse. 
7. Undertake nursing and health human resource development training and research, which shall include, but is not limited to, the development of advanced nursing practice.
>[!ERROR] Limitations
>These nursing acts are not applicable to nursing students. Students require supervision for every major nursing procedure without appropriate supervision of a qualified nursing faculty. Furthermore, all nursing care in all settings is duty-bound to observe the Code of Ethics for nurses and uphold the standards of safe nursing practice. The nurse is to maintain competence by continual learning through continuing professional education to be provided by the accredited professional organization or any recognized professional nursing organization approved by the Board.

## Altruism
This character among nurses demands a **sense of selflessness** and **truly caring for others despite the absence of financial gains or compensation**. Nurses display altruism when they do things for others **with their well-being in mind**. The consideration of well-being distinguished altruism from other ideals, like a sense of duty.
## Caring Attitude
Nursing requires **diligent efforts in faint for others**. It is the only occupation where monetary compensation is not the primary reason for providing care, rather, it is service to those in need. Nurses must uphold a truly caring attitude for all clients **regardless of economic or social status**.

**Jean Watson**, a nursing theorist (1997) explores caring in her nursing model, the "**Theory of Human Caring**". She defines caring as "*science of persons and human health-illness experiences that are mediated by professional, personal, scientific, esthetic, and ethical human transactions.*" Seven assumptions were made to illustrate such a form of nursing: 
1. Caring can only be effectively demonstrates and practices interpersonally. 
2. Caring consists of carative factors that result in the satisfaction of certain human needs. 
3. Effective caring promotes health and individual or family growth. 
4. Caring responses accept the patient as they are now, as well as what they may become. 
5. A caring environment is one that offers the development of potential while allowing the patient to cost the best action for themself at a given point in time. 
6. The science of caring is complementary to the science of curing.
7. The practice of caring is central to nursing.
## Competence
**Competence** is the possession of required skills, knowledge, and trainings in providing safe care to patients, involving both theoretical and related learning processes in school and on the field. R.A. 9173 mandates various processes undertaken, such as in-service trainings and continuing education programs.
1. **Sec. 25**: **Nursing Education Program**: prescription of a curriculum as promulgated by the Commission on Higher Education's policies and standards of nursing education.
2. **Sec. 30**: **Studies for Nursing Manpower Needs, Production, Utilization, and Development**: the Board and accredited organizations conduct studies on health human resources production, utilization, and development.
3. **Sec. 31**: **Comprehensive Nursing Specialty Program**: specialization programs managed by the accredited professional organization.
Additionally, the [[B419/03|National Nursing Care Competencies Standards]] were produced as a monitoring and evaluation scheme implemented and utilized effectively in nursing education, licensure, and service. It covers eleven areas for evaluation: safe and quality nursing care, management of resources and environment, health education, legal responsibility, ethic/moral responsibility, personal and professional development, quality improvement, research, record management, communication, and collaboration & teamwork.

The **Continuing Professional Development** Act of 2016 (R.A. 10912) is the most recent provision to ensure competency. It is the requirement of CPD units as a mandatory requirement for re-licensure:
- **Sec. 4**: **Strengthening the CPD Program**: competencies and qualifications are up to PQF, AQRF, and ASEAN MRAs. This ensures international alignment of competencies and qualifications through career progression mechanisms leading to specialization/sub-specialization.
- **Sec. 5**: **Nature of CPD Programs**: varied; ranges from structured to non-structured, which include (a) formal learning, (b) non-formal learning, (c) informal learning, (d) self-directed learning, (e) online learning activities, and (f) professional work experience.
- **Sec. 10**: **CPD as a Mandatory Requirement in Re-licensure and Accreditation**: CPD units are **mandatory** for all registered and licensed professionals under the regulation of the PRC.
- **Sec. 11**: **Recognition of Credit Units**: all duly validated and recognized CPD credit units earned by a professional shall be accumulated and transferred in accordance with the Pathways and Equivalencies of the PQF.
- **Sec. 12**: **Career Progression and Specialization**: accredited government agencies and stakeholders shall formulate and implement a Career Progression and Specialization Program for every profession.
- **Sec. 13**: **Role of Concerned Government Agencies and the Private Section**: CPDs should be included as part of all human resource development plan and programs in all concerned government agencies and private organizations.
## Ethical Practice
The nurse **observes the mortality of human conduct, values, and standards**. It involves the rightness and the wrongfulness of human actions. When ethical dilemmas arise, the nurse practically applies the ethical standards in the profession. Ethical principles are applied in the delivery of nursing care. The **Code of Ethics** is a group of principles or ideals that guide the behavior and decision-making practices of an individual or group with similar goals and objectives. This is further discussed in Chapter 05.
>[!INFO] Preamble
> Health is a fundamental right of every individual. The Filipino registered nurse, believing in the worth and dignity of each human being, recognizes the primary responsibility to preserve health at all cost. This responsibility encompasses promotion of health, prevention of illness, alleviation of suffering, and the restoration of health. However, when the foregoing are not possible, assistance towards a peaceful death shall be his/her obligation.
## Service-Oriented
The goal of professional nursing practice is to **deliver optimum level of health for all**, both sick and well, regardless of whether capable of fees or otherwise. Such is the essence of the phrase, "nursing is service" to others. Profit is not the reason for practice of nursing profession, but to contribute in the health and function of every client.
## Specialized Area of Practice
Nursing requires **well-defined skills continuously and exclusively performed**. Licensed members demonstrate bedside skills and procedures exclusively. Various specialization programs have been adopted through the years by 

___
6. **Altruism**: the nurse is selfless and services others without regard for compensation or reward.
7. **Caring Attitude**: the nurse puts in diligent efforts to care for any client, sick or well, and regardless of the patient's economic or social status.
8. **Competency**: the nurse is competent in all of their duties, and continues professional training to keep up with changes in patient care. The nurse should be able to recognize when they are not qualified for their duties and act accordingly.
	- R.A. 10912, The **Continuing Professional Development** (CPD) Act of 2017 for nursing mandates 15 credit units for professional license renewal, in this case every 3 years. These are obtained from formal learning, non-formal learning, informal learning, self-directed learning, online learning activities, and professional work experience.
9. **Ethical**: the nurse follows the nursing [[#code of ethics]] and is equipped with the morality of human conduct, values, and standards.
10. **Service-Oriented**: the nurse is dedicated to service, in that they are able to anticipate, recognize, and meet the patients' needs.
11. **Specialized**: the nursing profession requires a specialized body of knowledge and well-defined skills.
## Scope of Nursing Practice
The scope of nursing practice is defined under Section 28, Article VI of the Philippine Nursing Act of 2002. A person is said to practice nursing when they render nursing services to other individuals or groups from womb to tomb. Nursing services include but are not limited to:
1. Provision of care through the nursing process
2. Collaborate with communal resources and health teams
3. Provide health education
4. Take student nurses as apprentices
5. Undertake nursing and health human resource development, training, and research.
## Roles of a Professional Nurse
1. **Caregiver**: to **provide care and comfort**, show concern for client welfare and safety, and utilize scientific knowledge in activities to do so.
2. **Change Agent**: to initiate or assist in **changing the patient's condition or lifestyle, or the systems of care** via Kurt Lewis' **Unfreeze, Change, Refreeze** theory
3. **Counselor**: helping the client **recognize and cope with psychologic or social problems**, develop an improved interpersonal relationship, **promote personal growth**, develop new or alternate attitudes, feelings, and behaviors, **recognizing health choices**, and developing a sense of control.
4. **Teacher**: **provide information** regarding health, help the client learn or **acquire new knowledge and skills**, and encourage adherence to treatment and healthy lifestyles.
5. **Researcher**: participate in **identifying significant researchable problems** and using the research process for **investigation**.
6. **Advocate**: **promote for what is best** for the client, ensuring that their needs are met and **rights are not violated**; **support the client's decisions**.
7. **Manager**: makes decisions and coordinates the activities of others, delegating  and allocating resources appropriately. **Managers plan, direct, develop, monitor, and evaluate the quality of care and personnel**. They represent the staff and administration as needed.