---
tags:
  - CMPA
---
# SIADH
Most commonly caused by ICP, this is a disorder of excessive ADH, where fluid retention (fluid volume excess) occurs and dilutional hyponatremia occurs. Seizures may occur. Priority for the nurse is safety.
# DI
Most commonly caused by ICP, this is a disorder of inadequate ADH, where fluid loss (fluid volume deficit) occurs and dehydration occurs.
___
# DM
Characterized by inadequate or ineffective insulin in the body. An important complication is DKA, where a fluid volume deficit occurs. Intervention is through fluid replacement (Plain NSS, LR; assess lungs regularly for fluid overload) and insulin.
## Diagnostic Examination
1. **Fasting Blood Sugar** of >126 mg/dL and **Random Blood Sugar** of >200 mg/dL
## Management
1. Insulin
	- IV: regular, SQ: all insulin forms
## Complications
1. **Macrovascular Complications**: stroke, heart attack, heart failure
___
# Cushing's Syndrome
Elevated steroid hormones in the blood. Blood pressure, sodium, and glucose are elevated, and potassium is low (U-wave become abnormal)
___
# Addison's Disease
AKA Adrenal Crisis, Adrenal Insufficiency where steroid hormones are deficient. Blood pressure, sodium, and glucose are low, and potassium is high. Fluid volume deficit is present.
___
# Arrythmias
1. **Absent P-Wave**, **Atrial Fibrillation**: may lead to a cardioembolic stroke.
2. **Rapid P-Wave**, **Atrial Flutter**: rapid P-wave
3. **Missing QRS-Wave**, **2nd Degree Atrioventricular Block**: characterized by bradycardia (prepare atropine).
4. **Prolonged PR Interval**, **1st Degree Atrioventricular Block**
5. **Complete Heart Block**, **3rd Degree Atrioventricular Block**
	- All heart blocks result in bradycardia. Prepare atropine. If ineffective, prepare for a pacemaker insertion.
6. **Narrow QRS Complex**, **Supraventricular Tachycardia**: prepare adenosine
7. **Wide QRS Complex**, **Ventricular Tachycardia**, **Ventricular Fibrillation**, **Tachyarrhythmias**
	- VT with pulse: check pulse. If present, administer **Amniodarone**. If absent
	- VT, VF with no pulse: **defibrillation**
8. **Cardiac Arrest**, **Asystole**: **epinephrine**, **CPR**
	- Place the patient on **hemodynamic monitoring**: **CVP** monitors the right side of the heart and fluid volume, and **PAC** checks pressure in the left side of the heart.
___
# CHF
May be caused by MI, Valvular Diseases, and Coronary Artery Diseases.
Right: hepatomegaly, jaundice, distended jugular veins, ascites, edema
Left: pulmonary edema
## Left-Sided Heart Failure
___
# MI
- **Drug of choice**: morphine (antidote for morphine: naloxone Narcan)
- **Anticoagulants**: prevent blood clotting. Heparin (antidote: protanine), warfarin (antidone: Vitamin K)
- **Novel Anticoagulants**: rivaro**xaban**, api**xaban**
	- Side effects: bleeding
- **Antiplatelets**: prevention of platelet aggregation
___
# Angina
1. **Stable**: pain occurs with exertion, relieved by rest
2. **Unstable**: pain occurs with exertion, not relieved by rest
3. **Variant**/**Prinz-Metal**: pain occurs at rest, relieved by rest.
___
# Reading Simple ABGs
1. **pH**: 7.35 - 7.45. Lower than normal is acidosis, higher is alkalosis.
2. **CO2**: 35 - 45. Lower than normal is alkalosis, higher is acidosis.
3. **HCO3**: 22 - 26. Lower than normal is acidosis, higher is alkalosis.
4. Whichever of the **CO2** (respiratory) and **HCO3** (metabolic) readings **agree with the pH** is the result. If both agree, it is **combined** or **mixed**.
# Reading ABG Compensations
1. **Fully Compensated**
	- Read the pH. If it is normal, full compensation is achieved. Identify which region the pH is closer to even in the normal range. Determine the match from CO2 or HCO3 to differentiate respiratory from metabolic pH imbalance.
		- pH 7.44, CO2 12, HCO3 3: Fully Compensated Respiratory Alkalosis
2. **Partially Compensated**
	- Read the pH. If none of the values are normal, compensation is partial. Same rules as before are observed.
3. **Uncompensated**
	- If one of CO2 or HCO3 is normal, but the pH is abnormal, no compensation has been achieved.
___
# DKA
Features Kussmaul's Breathing, metabolic acidosis, dehydration, and kidney failure
___
# Renal Failure
## Signs and Symptoms
1. **Acidosis** (metabolic), **Anemia**, **Azotemia** (increased creatine; avoid meat and too many fruits that elevate potassium and phosphorus).
2. **Blood Pressure** is **Elevated**
3. **Calcium** is decreased
4. **DUK**
5. **Edema**
## Acute Renal Failure
Split between a diuretic and oliguric phase, respectively featuring fluid volume deficit and excess and their associated signs and symptoms.
1. **Pre-Renal** ARF: often develops from shock (cardiogenic, septic, hypovolemic, hemorrhagic, anaphylactic, etc).
2. **Intra-renal failure**: may develop from any damage to the kidney e.g. nephrotoxic drugs, kidney disease (stones, pyelonephritis, etc.), contrast dyes
3. **Post-Renal** ARF: ureter stones, bladder stones, prostate cancer
## Signs and Symptoms

## Chronic Renal Failure
The main cause of CRF is diabetes mellitus.
___
# Pneumonia
1. **CAP**: most commonly streptococcus pneumoniae in adults, and haemophiluz influenzae type b (HiB) in children.
2. **DOC**: amoxicillin
3. **DX**: CXR (confirmatory)