---
tags:
  - CMPA
title: Sensory Disorders (Eyes, Ears)
date: 2024-10-19
---
Also read: [[ANPH/15-1|Anatomy of the eyes]]
# Anatomy of the Eyes
The eye is made up of various layers:
1. Outer:
	1. **Sclera**
	2. **Cornea** (avasular)
2. Middle
	1. **Uvea**
	2. **Iris**, the pigmented ring of accommodating tissue that controls the amount of light to enter the eyes; these cause pupillary constriction (miosis) in the presence of light, and cause pupillary dilation (medriasis) in the presence of darkness. The examination of the pupil with a penlight to detect these constrictions or dilatations assesses the function of **CN III** (oculomotor nerve).
		- Drugs that induce miosis are called **miotics**. Drugs that induce medriasis are called **medriatics**.
	3. **Ciliary Body**: the producer of aqueous humor that occupies that fills the eye. This is implicated in glaucoma when overproduction results in an increase in IOP.
	4. **Choroid**
3. Inner
	1. **Retina**: contains retinal vessels and is the sensory unit of the eyes. These function with **CN II** (optic nerve), assessed with **Snellen's chart** (visual acuity).
>[!TIP] Cranial Nerve V: The Trigeminal Nerve
>The nerve that innervates the cornea via the ophthalmic branch, maxillary branch, and mandibular branch. The reflex tested for the eye is the **corneal reflex**, which causes the individual to blink when a cotton wisp is used to stimulate the cornea.

___
# Inflammation of the Eyes
1. **Scleritis**: inflammation of the sclera
2. **Iritis**: inflammation of the iris
3. **Retinitis**: inflammation of the retina
4. **Keratitis**: inflammation of the cornea, especially after corneal abrasion e.g. due to contact lenses.
5. **Blepharitis**: inflammation of the eyelidg
___
# Errors of Refraction
1. **Myopia**: near-sightedness, treated with concave lenses.
2. **Hyperopia**: far-sightedness, treated with convex lenses.
3. **Astigmatism**: irregular curvature of the cornea, treated with cylindrical lenses.
4. **Presbyopia**: far-sightedness that occurs with aging.
___
# Ocular Medications
1. **Eye drops**: therapeutic fluid administered at the lower conjunctiva.
>[!WARNING] Close drainage
>Place pressure on the area between the corner of the eye and the side of the nose to prevent systemic absorption of the drug (approx. 7% gets absorbed).

2. **Eye ointment**
___
# Cataracts
An increase in the **opacity of the lens** of the eyes. A **progressive, painless loss of vision** is the main characteristic of cataracts.
1. **Risk Factors**: *mn. CARDS*
	- Corticosteroids
	- **Aging**
	- Retinal Detachment
	- Diabetes Mellitus, Down Syndrome
	- **Smoking**
2. **Symptoms**
	- **Painless** blurring of vision
	- **White-colored** or cloudy lens/pupil
3. **Treatment**: cataracts are done primarily through **lens removal** (**phacoemulsification**). This may be done with ultrasound vibrations that breaks the lens into fragments. Patients without lens are **aphakic** (has aphakia). Surgical management is through **lens replacement**, which uses **lens implants** or **corrective lenses**.
4. **Nursing Intervention**
	- Post-op: monitor vital signs, level of consciousness, and dressings.
	- Elevate the **head of the bed**.
	- Lie on the **unaffected side**.
	- **Eyeglasses** will be given for the patient when discharged to reduce glare. At night, an **eye shield** is used to prevent trauma such as scratching.
	- Avoid activities that elevate the IOP: sneezing, coughing, straining or using the valsalva maneuver (utilize a papaya + high residue/fiber diet) to prevent constipation, **laxatives** may be given. **Antiemetics** may be given for vomiting patients. Increased IOP may cause hemorrhaging and pain.
	- Priority after surgery: **safety**. Set siderails.
___
# Glaucoma
**Increased IOP** (normal: 10 to 21 mmHg) due to an imbalance in the **production and drainage of aqueous humor**. This results in nerve damage to the optic nerve (CN II).
1. **Signs and Symptoms**: 
	1. **Open Angle Glaucoma**: loss of **peripheral** vision (tunnel vision), where halos are seen when around lights.
	2. **Closed Angle Glaucoma**: headache and eye pain present due to higher IOP compared to open angle.
2. **Risk Factors**
	1. **Smoking**, **Steroids**
	2. **Aging**, **Family History**, **High Myopia**
	3. **Diabetes Mellitus**
3. **Diagnostic Examination**
	1. **History**
	2. **Tonometry** through a tonometer, which measures IOP
4. **Nursing Intervention**
	1. Priority Nursing Diagnosis: **risk for injury** due to sensory impairment; ensure safety.
	2. **Keep lights open** to promote pupil constriction. Dark environments allow for dilation, increasing IOP.
	3. Avoid all activities that increase IOP; sneezing, coughing, vomiting, straining, valsalva maneuver
5. **Treatment**: decrease production, increase outflow; the main goal is to reduce IOP to prevent CN II damage, which can result in irreversible blindness
	1. **Miotics**: drugs that constrict the pupil e.g. **Pilocarpine** and **Carbachol**. The constriction allows for outflow to be faster, draining the eye.
	2. **Topical Beta-Blockers** instilled at the lower conjunctiva; **betaxolol**, **timolol**. These decrease humor production Always monitor heart rate to check for bradycardia. Trivia: only 7% of eye drops enter systemic circulation.
	3. **Diuretics**: to reduce pressure by reducing fluid content; acetazolamide (diamox)
	4. **Prostaglandin Analogs/Agonist**: **travoprost**, **latanoprost**; these facilitate humor drainage.
	5. **Surgical Management**: iridectomy, iridotomy used to facilitate aqueous drainage.
___
# Retinal Detachment
The separation of the **choroid from the retina**, forming a retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) detached from the sensory layer.
1. **Causes**
	1. Diabetic retinopathy
	2. Aphakia
	3. Tumor of the eye
	4. Inflammation of the eye: uvitis (middle layer inflammation)
	5. High myopia
2. **Symptoms**:
	1. **Flashes** of light and sight of **floaters** (light spots on the foreground of one's sight)
	2. Sense of a **curtain** being drawn over the eye.
	3. **Painless blurring** of vision.
3. **Treatment**
	1. **Scleral buckle**, which promote reattachment of the choroid to the senosry retina.
	2. **Pneumatic retinopexy**, where the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) is pushed into the retina via the administration of gas bubbles or silicone oil into the vitreous cavity.
		- Importantly, position the patient **PRONE** after surgery to position the gas bubble properly in pushing the RPE to the retina.
		- Avoid activities that increases IOP: sneezing, coughing, straining/valsalva, vomiting (use antiemetics), constipation (use high fiber/high residue + papaya diet, or laxatives as ordered)
___
# Ear Disorders
1. **External Ear**: ear canal
	- Erythematous ear canal; **otitis externa**, inflammation of the ear canal.
	- The ear canal is normally skin colored. If inflamed, it is erythematous.
	- Aural tenderness occurs, where manipulation of the pinna, oracle, or canal causes pain.
	- Treatment: **analgesics** (otic drops)
2. **Middle Ear**: tympanic membrane, eustachian tube (connects the ear to the nasopharynx), malleus, indus, stapes (ossicles).
	- Problems with the external or middle ear that results in hearing loss is **conductive hearing loss**
	- In **otitis media**, the tympanic membrane bulges and becomes erythematous (normally pearly grey).
	- A consequence of **URTIs** travelling through the eustachian tube.
3. **Inner Ear**: a.k.a. labyrinth; vestibule (semicircular canal), and cochlea
	- **Labyrinthitis**.
	- Problems with the inner ear or labyrinth that results in hearing loss is **sensorineural hearing loss**. Often caused by (mn. LMP) **labyrinthitis**, **Meniere's syndrome**, and **presbycusis**.

>[!INFO] Hearing Loss
>Hearing loss may be **conductive** from the affectation of the conducting system of the ears, **sensorineural** from the affectation of the sensory organ or the nervous system, or **functional** from psychological or emotional blocking-out of stimulus.

## Otitis Externa
Containing the ear canal and other external ear structures, otitis externa is the **inflammation of the ear canal**. Because it commonly occurs after swimming, it is called "*swimmer's ear*"
1. **Symptoms**
	1. Erythematous ear canal
	2. Aural Tenderness
2. **Treatment**
	1. **Antibiotics** for infection
	2. **Analgesia** with otic drugs (ear drops) for pain
## Otitis Media
Associated with URTIs (cough or cold). This features a **tympanic membrane that bulges and becomes erythematous**. Hearing loss associated with this condition is **conductive hearing loss**. If untreated, this may also cause **mastoiditis**.
1. **Symptoms**
	1. **Fever**
	2. **Ear Pain** (Otalgia), a classic symptom of otitis media.
	3. **Ear Pressure**
	4. **Bulging Eardrum**
	5. **Ear Discharge**
2. **Treatment**
	1. **Antibiotics** and **analgesia**
	2. **Tympanotomy** or **Myringotomy**: a surgical perforation of the tympanic membrane used to relieve otalgia by decreasing pressure by facilitate drainage. A repair (tympanoplasty, myringoplasty)
## Mastoiditis
A complication of **otitis media**.
1. **Symptoms**: the tympanic membrane is described as (mn. DIRT) dull, immobile, red, and thick.
2. **Treatment**: surgery to remove infected mastoid ear cells: **mastoidectomy**.
	- If unsuccessful in removing infected cells, meningitis, dizziness, and damage to CN 6 (abducens) and 7 (facial).
## Otosclerosis
Abnormal bone growth at the level of the **stapes**, common in **pregnant women**.
1. **Symptoms**
	1. Conductive hearing loss
	2. Normal tympanic membrane (pearly grey)
	3. Often occurs in pregnant patients.
2. **Treatment**
	1. **Stapedectomy**: removal of the stapes and abnormal bone growths.
	2. Application of **hearing aids**
	3. **Sodium fluoride** may prevent otosclerosis.
## Presbycusis
A form of sensorineural hearing loss related to aging. Hearing is lost due to age because of degenerative changes (atrophy) of the cochlea. Irreversible.
## Meniere's Disease
An inner ear (labyrinth) disorder, where there is an **increased fluid** (endolymphatic fluid) **in the membranous labyrinth**. It is primarily **idiopathic**.
1. **Symptoms**
	- **Tinnitus**, ringing within the ears.
	- **Sensorineural Hearing Loss**
	- **Vertigo** (most common and troublesome due to affectation of the cochlea)
2. **Management**
	1. **Risk for falls or injury** due to impaired vestibular function; **ensure safety**.
	2. **Low sodium diet** as episodes may be related to high sodium consumption, which further increase fluid volume.
	3. **Diuretics** to reduce fluid volume if prescribed.
	4. **Endolymphatic drainage**
	5. **Vestibular nerve resection** to remove vertigo.
	6. **Labyrinthectomy**, removal of the inner ear. Permanent deafness.