---
tags:
  - CMPA
  - MS
  - INC
title: 10-07-2024 Cardiologic Disorders
date: 2024-10-07
---
The following discussion is based on a live discussion by **Dr. Liela R. Ferrer, MD, PhD, MAED, CSPSH, FIAMS, FPASMAP, FPCGM**.
___
# Review of Anatomy and Physiology
The **heart** is the major circulatory organ of the body. It roughly weighs 300 grams and is divided between two general systems:
1. **Left Side**: the part of the heart that pumps blood into systemic circulation.
2. **Right Side**: the part of the heart that pumps blood into pulmonic circulation.

The heart is composed of four chambers and four valves:
1. **Right Atrium**: receives blood from the superior and inferior vena cavae, being the terminal point of systemic circulation. Blood from this chamber passes through the tricuspid valve to move to the right ventricle.
2. **Tricuspid Valve**
3. **Right Ventricle**: receives blood from the right atrium, and sends blood into pulmonic circulation through the pulmonic valve.
4. **Pulmonic Valve**
5. **Left Atrium**: receives freshly oxygenated blood from the pulmonic arteries, and sends blood into the left ventricular
6. **Mitral Valve**
7. **Left Ventricle**: the most muscular chamber, as it is the chamber responsible for pumping blood out into systemic circulation.
8. **Aortic Valve**
>[!error] Valvular Disorders
>The inability of valves to close results in **regurgitation**, where blood flows backwards and impaired circulation. **Stenosis** is the opposite, where valves fail to open completely, limiting throughput. Both of these cause turbulent blood flow, which can be detected as **murmurs** auscultated with the bell of the stethoscope.
>1. Monitor heart sounds, cardiac output, and signs of endocarditis.
>2. If endocarditis occurs, **Penicillin G** is the drug of choice as an antibiotic.
>3. Surgical valve replacement may be done. Afterwards, anticoagulants are used to prevent thrombus formation.
>>[!INFO] Anticoagulants
>>
>>This is a class of drugs that prevent the formation of blood clots. These include common examples such as **heparin**, **warfarin**, and **enoxaparin**. Antidotes are used for bleeding related to anticoagulant use. **Protamine sulfate** for heparin (monitor PTT) and **Vitamin K** for warfarin (monitor PT and INR). More types of anticoagulants include:
>>- Oral antithrombin inhibitors (Dabigatran)
>>- Novel (new) oral anticoagulants (NOACs) include Apixaban, Edoxaban, Rivaroxaban
## Blood Pressure
**Blood pressure** is the total pressure used to circulate blood throughout the body. It is calculated with $\text{CO}\times\text{TPR}$ (total peripheral resistance).
- **Cardiac output** is the total volume of blood pumped by the heart within one minute. The normal CO is 4 to 8 liters/min. It is the product of **heart rate** (number of strokes in a minute) and **stroke volume** (amount of blood pumped with one stroke).
- **Stroke Volume** has three principal components: (a) **Preload**, the amount of blood filling the blood during relaxation, i.e., the amount it **stretches**; (b) **Afterload**, the amount of blood left in the heart after contraction, which increases as **resistance** increases; and (c) **contractility**, the ability of the heart to contract.
- These volumes are all connected. In cases of vasoconstriction, total peripheral resistance increases. In cases of vasodilation, blood pressure, cardiac output, and resistance all decrease.
>[!ERROR] Abnormalities
>1. **Hypertension** is the elevation of blood pressure. Treatment uses **vasodilators**, which decrease cardiac output, preload, afterload, contractility, and total peripheral resistance.
>2. **Shock** results in decreased tissue perfusion from decreased blood flow. Treatment uses **vasopressors**/**vasoconstrictors** to raise cardiac output. Examples of this includes dopamine, dobutamine, livufed.

Blood pressure is measured as **systolic** over **diastolic** pressure. Systolic pressure is denoted by the first Korotkoff sound, produced by contraction of the ventricles. Diastolic pressure is the remaining pressure once the heart becomes relaxed and the ventricles refill.
## Heart Sounds
The heart sounds are auscultated with a stethoscope. The diaphragm of the stethoscope is best for detecting S1 and S2, and the bell is best for S3, S4, and Murmurs.
1. **S<sub>1</sub>** (Systole): the sound created by the closure of the atrioventricular valves (Tricuspid, Mitral).
2. **S<sub>2</sub>** (Diastolic): the sound created by  the closure of the semilunar valves (Pulmonic, Aortic).
3. **S<sub>3</sub>** (Ventricular Gallop): an abnormal heart sound heard in heart failure.
4. **S<sub>4</sub>** (Atrial Gallop)
5. **Murmurs**: the sound blood makes when flow becomes turbulent, such as in valvular heart disease (VHD).
___
# Pericarditis
An inflammation of the pericardial sac, a covering of the heart.
1. **Etiology**: viral infection, Dressler's syndrome (post-MI), neoplasms, renal failure, radiation, and connective tissue diseases.
2. **Clinical Findings**: pain aggravated by inspiration is the most common symptom, and relieved with sitting or leaning forward. Infection results in leukocytosis, fever, and malaise.
	- A characteristic sign of pericarditis is a **pericardial friction rub** upon auscultation.
	- ECG shows ST elevation.
3. **Nursing Diagnosis**:
	- **Pain**
	- Risk of Decreased Cardiac Output
	- Risk of Ineffective Breathing related to Pain
4. **Management**: treat the cause of the pericarditis.
	- **Pain**: NSAIDs, analgesics
	- Monitoring for **cardiac tamponade**: diminished heart sounds, **jugular venous distention**, pulsus paradoxus, narrowed pulse pressure
5. **Medical Treatment**: **pericardiocentesis**, aspiration of the pericardial contents if pericardial effusion occurs; **dialysis** is renal failure is the cause of pericarditis (uremia)
## Pericardial Effusion
The pericardial sac normally only contains ~20 mL of fluid. In cases of inflammation, infection, or other disease processes, this fluid can accumulate and cause pericardial effusion. In severe cases, large volumes of fluid can cause **cardiac tamponade**. Heart sounds can become diminished, but a pericardial friction rub  may be heard.
___
# Heart Failure
**Heart  failure** is the loss of function of the heart, being unable to pump blood out into pulmonic (right-sided) or systemic circulation (left-sided).
1. **Etiology**: myocardial infarction, incompetent valves, cardiomyopathy (or any other disorders that affect the muscular layer of the heart).
2. **Right-Sided Heart Failure** (RSHF) features a **distended neck vein** (backing up of the SVC), **edema** (congestion of systemic circulation), **hepatomegaly** (backing up of the IVC), and **jaundice**.
	- **Diet**: low Na<sup>+</sup>, fluid limitation
3. **Left-Sided Heart Failure** (LSHF) features **pink frothy sputum**, crackles, orthopnea (positional dyspnea), and paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea from congestion of pulmonic circulation.
4. **Diagnostic Evaluation**:
	- **CXR** to visualize cardiomegaly
	- **2D ECHO** to evaluate **decrease in ejection fraction** (proportion of blood volume pumped out of the heart with each stroke) and **increased CVP** (for RSHF)
5. **Management**: mn. 4Ds
	- **Diuretics** to reduce pulmonary congestion. These include loop diuretics (Furosemide, Bumetanide) which lower serum potassium. Determine potential potassium imbalance in patients taking diuretics. The same caution is applied with potassium-sparing diuretics, which can result in hyperkalemia instead.
	- **Vasodilators** reduce total systemic resistance, allowing the heart to pump better by reducing the preload.
	- **Digoxin**, an inotropic, improves the contractility of the heart.
>[!WARNING] Digoxin
>The therapeutic window of Digoxin is narrow, making it prone to toxicity. In normal use, it should remain between **0.5 to 2.0 ng/mL**. 