# Communication
**Communication** is one of the most powerful and important skills of a nurse when dealing with patients, their families, and other health care providers. For patients, the focus of communication is to **establish trust** with the patients, and 
1. 1
2. 2
3. 3
4. 4
5. **Grapevine Communication**: an informal method of communication that naturally occurs (as if a vine growing) as clusters of individuals spend time together. This occurs outside of formal channels such as the break room, social media, etc.
___
# The Nursing Process
Also read: [[ADPIE|The Nursing Process]] (by Ma'am Tuiza)

All activities of nurses follow the principles of the nursing process. It is the framework which allows nurses to use their knowledge and skills to provide care and help clients meet their needs. It is a **systematic**, **rational** method of planning and providing care using the process of ADPIE. It is characterized as:
1. **Systematic**
2. **Skills and Knowledge-based**
3. **Cyclical**: the nursing process ends with evaluation, which evaluates both the interventions used and the outcomes achieved. This data can be used to stop, continue, or alter a care plan for patient care.
4. **Dynamic**
5. **Client-centered**
6. **Interpersonal and Collaborative**: despite it being named the "Nursing Process", it can be used to collaborate with other disciplines in delivering efficient, effective care.
7. **Universal**
8. **Goal-oriented**: the planning phase of the nursing process establishes goals and objectives of care that must be met for successful care.
9. **Priority-based**: a patient can experience several or multiple health needs, and the nurse determines priorities to immediate needs in clients using the **ABCs of Life**, **Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs**, and **Client Preference**.
## Assessment
The process of **collecting**, **organizing**, **validating**, and **recording data** about a client's health status. The data collected may be divided between **subjective** and **objective assessment cues**, depending on if the data collected is validated only by the patient (subjective) or if the data collected is observable or measurable.
>[!INFO] Data Sources
>Data may be collected from the **primary** (patient) and **secondary** (laboratory results, family statements, etc.) 

1. **Initial Assessment**: assessment done upon admission of the patient, including history-taking and assessment worksheets.
2. **Problem-Focused/Ongoing Assessment**: continuing assessment done after admission for identified problems and risks of the patient, e.g., assessment done every four hours in the ward.
3. **Emergency Assessment**: rapid (ABC) assessment during times of physiologic or psychologic crisis.
4. **Time-Lapse Assessment**: assessment performed over two periods of time.

In an assessment, the nurse uses various methods for gathering data:
1. **Observation**: the use of the five senses of the nurse to identify cues medically relevant.
2. **Interview**: a planned and purposive conversation between the nurse and the client.
	- **Directive Interview** (Structured Interview): a style of interview with optioned answers to elicit specific answers. These types of structures may be time-bound.
	- **Non-directive Interview** (Semistructured/Unstructured Interview): a style of interview with no specific answers, best for allowing the client to verbalize their thoughts and feelings, letting the patient lead the conversation.
3. **Physical Examination**: the implementation of IPPA, the four techniques of assessment.
	- **Inspection**: visual inspection of affected body systems for abnormalities.
	- **Palpation**: using the sense of touch to identify potential abnormalities.
	- **Percussion**: the use of tapping to elicit a sound which may be heard as dull, resonant, hyperresonant, etc.
	- **Auscultation**: auditory inspection of affected body systems (heart, blood flow in vessels, breath sounds, bowel sounds)
>[!TIP] Distinctly, abdominal assessment utilizes **IAPePa**, as percussion and palpation may alter bowel sounds heard during auscultation.
## Diagnosis
(a) **Clustering** and (b) **analysis** of data in order to (c) **formulate a nursing diagnosis**. Depending on the nature of the diagnosis, this may be
1. **Actual Diagnosis**: a diagnosis signified by the presence of associated signs and symptoms about the client's response to their health status.
2. **Risk Diagnosis**: a diagnosis tackling the presence of risk factors or providing prophylaxis against future potential problems of the patient.
3. **Possible Diagnosis**: an indication for the need of further assessment and data to determine the presence of a *possible* diagnosis.
4. **Wellness Diagnosis**: a clinical judgment about the potential transition from one level of health to a higher level of health.

>[!WARNING] vs. Medical Diagnoses
>Medical diagnoses identify the disease at hand, its pathology, and does not describe *human responses*. As long as the disease remains, this diagnosis does not change. In contrast, **nursing diagnoses describe human responses** to the disease *process* or health problem. These change throughout the disease process and can change frequently, and are limited to the scope of the nursing profession.

A nursing diagnosis can be composed of three components:
1. **Problem**: the actual problem presented. This may be presented with **quantifiers** such as "*Ineffective*", and "*Risk for*" that contextualize the patient.
2. **Etiology**: the factors or causes related to the problem
3. **Signs and Symptoms**: manifestations of the problem on the patient
## Planning
A deliberate, systematic phase of the nursing process that involves (a) **decision-making** and (b) **problem-solving** skills. In involves:
1. Establishing priorities
2. Writing goals and outcomes and developing an evaluation strategy for them.
3. 3
4. 4
5. 5

| Type of Planning       | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
| ---------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| **Initial Planning**   | **Admission** assessment that develops the initial comprehensive plan of care that is **initiated as soon as possible*                                                                                                                                                                |
| **Ongoing Planning**   | Occurs at the beginning of **every shift or daily** for determining required care for a nurse's shift. It determines:<br>- Changes in health status<br>- Set priorities and decide problems to focus on<br>- Coordinate the nurse's activit                                           |
| **Discharge Planning The anticipation and planning for **client needs after discharge**. **==Effective discharge planning begins at first client contact or admission==**.<br>- Simple/Basic Discharge Plan: patient is sent home<br>- Complex Discharge Plan: patient is referred to another institution an:  |

>[!INFO] Priority Setting
>The process of establishing the **preferential sequence or rank of interventions** in accordance to the client's most immediate needs.
## Implementation
1. **Independent Interventions**: actions that the nurse is able to perform with their own discretion and clinical judgment skills. These include interventions such as positioning, low flow oxygen therapy, tepid sponge baths, etc.
2. **Dependent Interventions**: 
3. **Collaborative Interventions**:

>[!ERROR] What is not documented, was not done.
## Evaluation
___
# 