---
title: Concepts of Mental Health and Mental Illness
tags:
  - B317
---
# Mental Health Care Delivery Systems
## Levels of Care
1. **Primary Care**: **first point of contact**; outpatient-based care.
2. **Secondary Care**: referral to **psychologists and psychiatrists** where short hospital visits and consultation-liaison services e.g. assessment, counseling, and/or prescription drugs.
3. **Tertiary Care**: referral to **psychiatric institutions** if the mental illness needs specialized care or rehabilitation.
## Mental Health Service Institutions
- **National Center for Mental Health** (Mandaluyong), previously named the **Insular Psychopathic Hospital** established in 1925 (opened in 1928) under the **Public Works Act 3258**. It is also a **special research training center**, and is a training facility for psychiatric doctors and nurses, among other affiliations. It has a bed capacity of 4,600 and serves 3,000 inpatients daily.
- **Philippine Mental Health Association, Inc.** (Quezon City) is a private, non-stock, non-profit organization dedicated to the promotion of mental health and prevention of mental disorders. It has 9 chapters around the Philippines. It was established in 1950 with Dr. Manuel Arguelles serving as president. They offer **Education and Information Services** (EIS), **Clinical and Diagnostic Services** (CDS), and **Intervention Services** (IS; split between the Center for Children and Youth, Adult Work Center)
  - **The Medical City**, **Philippine General Hospital** (PGH), **Manila Doctors Hospital** (MDH), **University of the East Ramon Magsaysay Memorial Medical Center** (UERMMMC) among [others](https://www.webbline.com/mental-health/).
  - **Suicide Prevention Hotlines**
	  - **Natasha Goulbourn Foundation** (NGF): 2191 (Toll-free for GLOBE and TM subscribers), (02) 804-HOPE (4673), 0917 558 HOPE (4673)
	  - **Manila Lifeline Centre** (MLC): (02) 896-9191 or 0917 354 9191.
___
# Importance of Mental Health
1. **Belonging**: a community provides **a sense of belonging**. A true sense of belonging results in a feeling that **the community will embrace and appreciate a person's unique qualities**.
2. **Support**: for times of difficulty situations, **people who will help one feel safe and cared for**, with a positive outlook on life.
3. **Purpose**: the provision of roles will **give one a sense of purpose** through bettering other people's lives. Helping others is one of the best ways to help oneself.
___
# Global and Regional Perspective on Mental Health
## Mental Health Act (RA 11036)
This law proposes a mental health policy that aims to **enhance the delivery of, promote, and provide access to mental health services and care** on all institutional levels. It promotes and protects the **rights of the individuals utilizing psychiatric, neurologic, and psychosocial health services**.
## Mental Health Gap Action Program
A [[CHN1/4-1#World Health Organization (WHO)|WHO]] program (est. 2008) collaborating with the [[CHN1/4-1#Department of Health|DOH]] and LGUs to scale up care for **MNS** (Mental, Neurologic, Substance Use) **disorders**. Its goal of treating and preventing psychosis, epilepsy, depression, and suicide may be met with non-specialist care training.
___
# Psychobiologic Bases of Behavior
**Behavior is determined by biology**. There is a **genetic basis** for all behaviors and variance in what we think and feel. Most behavior has an **adaptive or evolutionary function**, and have their origins in **specific locations of the brain**.
___
# Concepts and Patterns of Human Behavior

## Family Dynamics
The functioning of a family in good and bad situations. This involves decision-making, problem solving, and sharing feelings. There are various types of **family structures**: **Nuclear** (Parents and Children), **Single Parent Families** (One parent and children), **Extended Family** (Nuclear + Non-First Degree Relatives), **Childless Family**, **Grandparent Family** (Grandparents take care of grandchildren), **Stepfamily**
## Needs and Behavior
"**Needs**" are **internal motives that energize, direct, and sustain behavior**. These are *strivings* necessary for the **maintenance of life** e.g. physiological needs and for the **promotion of growth** and wellbeing.
### Abraham Harold Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs
1. **Physiological**: breathing, food, water, sex, sleep, homeostasis, excretion
2. **Safety**: security of body, of employment, of resources, of morality, of the family, of health, and of property.
3. **Love/Belonging**: friendship, family, and sexual intimacy.
4. **Esteem**: self-esteem, confidence, achievement, respect of others and by others.
5. **Self-Actualization**: morality, creativity, spontaneity, problem solving, lack of prejudice, acceptance of facts.
	- Self actualization is **a person's motivation to reach his or her full potential**. Previous needs **must be met** before self-actualization can be achieved.
## Conflicts and Frustrations
"**Conflict**" is a painful emotional state that results from tension, opposition, and contradiction (Douglas, Holland). It is brought by the presence of two or more opposing desires in an individual (Barney, Lehner). There are various sources in differing environments:
- **Home**: faulty upbringing, unhealthy relationships, overprotection
- **School**: teachers, faulty teaching methodology, denial of self-expression, classmates
- **Occupation**: improper working environment, unsatisfactory relationships, dissatisfactory working conditions

"**Frustration**" refers to emotional tension resulting from **non-fulfillment of desires or needs**. (Good, 1959). It may be caused by failure to **satisfy basic needs** because of **internal or external obstacles** (Barney, Lehner)
- **External Factors**: **physical** (natural calamities, accidents, injury), **societal** (norms and values that may restrict individual needs), **economic and financial** (unemployment, lack of money)
- **Internal Factors**: physical abnormality or defects, conflicting desires, morality and high ideals, level of aspirations (inability to meet one's aspirations)
## Anxiety and Anxiety Responses
"**Anxiety**" is a vague, unpleasant feeling of **apprehension**. It may be a response to unknown and non-specific threats. It normally motivates a person to take action for resolving a problem or crisis. It may become **abnormal** when **excessive**, **chronic**, and results in **impairment of major functioning** e.g. panic without reason, phobias, and uncontrollable repetitive actions. There are various types:
1. **Mild Anxiety**:
	- **Perception**: increased
	- **Behavior**: alert, energetic, attentive
	- **Physiologic Changes**: slight discomfort, restlessness, "butterflies in my stomach", difficulty sleeping.
	- **Coping**: adaptive
	- **Nursing Management**: none
2. **Moderate Anxiety**:
	- **Perception**: decreased, selective
	- **Behavior**: difficulty in concentration, easily distracted, **pacing**
	- **Physiologic Changes**: clammy hands, diaphoresis, muscle tension, GI distress, headache, xerostomia, frequent urination
	- **Coping**: palliative; the use of any defense mechanism available.
	- **Nursing Management**: refocus attention; supervise in problem solving and learning. When talking, keep it short and simple (KISS).
	- **Medical Management**: oral anxiolytics
3. **Severe Anxiety**:
	- **Perception**: distorted perception
	- **Behavioral**: impaired rational, decision-making, problem solving, judging, concentration, and ability. Confusion and disorientation.
	- **Physiologic Changes**: increased BP, RR, CR, chest pain, **severe headache**, nausea and vomiting, diarrhea, tremors, dilated pupils.
	- **Coping**: excessive, maladaptive defense mechanisms.
	- **Nursing Management**: relaxation techniques, decrease environmental stimuli, stay or walk with the patient, and listen attentively.
	- **Medical Management**: intramuscular anxiolytics
4. **Panic Anxiety**:
	- **Perception**: disorganized
	- **Behavioral**: immobilization, hysterical or mute, irrational reasoning, overwhelmed and helpless - suicidal, potential hallucination or delusions.
	- **Physiological**: same as severe anxiety, shortness of breath, and hyperventilation.
	- **Coping**: dysfunctional use of defense mechanisms.
	- **Nursing Management**: provide safety, reduce environmental stimuli, continuously talk with the patient, **use touch judiciously**, and stay with the person during their panic attack (5 to 30 minutes).

| Type | Perception | Behavioral | Coping | Nursing Management | Medical Management |
| ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- |
| **Mild** | Widened | Alert, Energetic, Attentive | Adaptive | None | N/A |
| **Moderate** | Narrowed | Distracted, Pacing | Palliative | Refocus, Supervision, KISS | PO Anxiolytic |
| **Severe** | Distorted | Impaired thinking, Confusion, Disorientation | Excessive, Maladaptive | Relaxation, Less Stimuli, Presence, Listening | IM Anxiolytic |
| **Panic** | Disorganized | Immobilization, Mute/Hysterical, Irrational, Overwhelmed (Suicidal), Potential Hallucination/Delusion | Dysfunctional | Safety, Less Stimuli, Presence (judicious touch) | N/A |
___

