---
title: Concepts and Patterns of Human Behavior
tags:
  - B317
description: An introduction to human behavioral patterns (Family Dynamics, Anxiety, Needs and Behavior, Conflict, Adaptation, Coping, Defense Mechanisms, and Crises)
---
# Psychobiologic Bases of Behavior
**Behavior is determined by biology**. There is a **genetic basis** for all behaviors and variance in what we think and feel. Most behavior has an **adaptive or evolutionary function**, and have their origins in **specific locations of the brain**.
___
# Family Dynamics
The functioning of a family in good and bad situations. This involves decision-making, problem solving, and sharing feelings. There are various types of **family structures**:
- **Nuclear**: parents and children
- **Single Parent Families**: one parent and children
- **Extended Family**: the same as nuclear + non-first degree relatives
- **Childless Family**
- **Grandparent Family**: grandparents take care of grandchildren
- **Stepfamily**
___
# Needs and Behavior
"**Needs**" are **internal motives that energize, direct, and sustain behavior**. These are *strivings* necessary for the **maintenance of life** e.g. physiological needs and for the **promotion of growth** and wellbeing.
## Abraham Harold Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs
1. **Physiological**: breathing, food, water, sex, sleep, homeostasis, excretion
2. **Safety**: security of body, of employment, of resources, of morality, of the family, of health, and of property.
3. **Love/Belonging**: friendship, family, and sexual intimacy.
4. **Esteem**: self-esteem, confidence, achievement, respect of others and by others.
5. **Self-Actualization**: morality, creativity, spontaneity, problem solving, lack of prejudice, acceptance of facts.
	- Self actualization is **a person's motivation to reach his or her full potential**. Previous needs **must be met** before self-actualization can be achieved.
___
# Conflicts and Frustrations
"**Conflict**" is a painful emotional state that results from tension, opposition, and contradiction (Douglas, Holland). It is brought by the presence of two or more opposing desires in an individual (Barney, Lehner). There are various sources in differing environments:
- **Home**: faulty upbringing, unhealthy relationships, overprotection
- **School**: teachers, faulty teaching methodology, denial of self-expression, classmates
- **Occupation**: improper working environment, unsatisfactory relationships, dissatisfactory working conditions

"**Frustration**" refers to emotional tension resulting from **non-fulfillment of desires or needs**. (Good, 1959). It may be caused by failure to **satisfy basic needs** because of **internal or external obstacles** (Barney, Lehner)
- **External Factors**: **physical** (natural calamities, accidents, injury), **societal** (norms and values that may restrict individual needs), **economic and financial** (unemployment, lack of money)
- **Internal Factors**: physical abnormality or defects, conflicting desires, morality and high ideals, level of aspirations (inability to meet one's aspirations)
___
# Anxiety and Anxiety Responses
"**Anxiety**" is a vague, unpleasant feeling of **apprehension**. It may be a response to unknown and non-specific threats. It normally motivates a person to take action for resolving a problem or crisis. It may become **abnormal** when **excessive**, **chronic**, and results in **impairment of major functioning** e.g. panic without reason, phobias, and uncontrollable repetitive actions.
## Types of Anxiety
1. **Mild Anxiety**:
	- **Perception**: increased
	- **Behavior**: alert, energetic, attentive
	- **Physiologic Changes**: slight discomfort, restlessness, "butterflies in my stomach", difficulty sleeping.
	- **Coping**: adaptive
	- **Nursing Management**: none
2. **Moderate Anxiety**:
	- **Perception**: decreased, selective
	- **Behavior**: difficulty in concentration, easily distracted, **pacing**
	- **Physiologic Changes**: clammy hands, diaphoresis, muscle tension, GI distress, headache, xerostomia, frequent urination
	- **Coping**: palliative; the use of any defense mechanism available.
	- **Nursing Management**: refocus attention; supervise in problem solving and learning. When talking, keep it short and simple (KISS).
	- **Medical Management**: oral anxiolytics
3. **Severe Anxiety**:
	- **Perception**: distorted perception
	- **Behavioral**: impaired rational, decision-making, problem solving, judging, concentration, and ability. Confusion and disorientation.
	- **Physiologic Changes**: increased BP, RR, CR, chest pain, **severe headache**, nausea and vomiting, diarrhea, tremors, dilated pupils.
	- **Coping**: excessive, maladaptive defense mechanisms.
	- **Nursing Management**: relaxation techniques, decrease environmental stimuli, stay or walk with the patient, and listen attentively.
	- **Medical Management**: intramuscular anxiolytics
4. **Panic Anxiety**:
	- **Perception**: disorganized
	- **Behavioral**: immobilization, hysterical or mute, irrational reasoning, overwhelmed and helpless - suicidal, potential hallucination or delusions.
	- **Physiological**: same as severe anxiety, shortness of breath, and hyperventilation.
	- **Coping**: dysfunctional use of defense mechanisms.
	- **Nursing Management**: provide safety, reduce environmental stimuli, continuously talk with the patient, **use touch judiciously**, and stay with the person during their panic attack (5 to 30 minutes).

| Type | Perception | Behavioral | Coping | Nursing Management | Medical Management |
| ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- |
| **Mild** | Widened | Alert, Energetic, Attentive | Adaptive | None | N/A |
| **Moderate** | Narrowed | Distracted, Pacing | Palliative | Refocus, Supervision, KISS | PO Anxiolytic |
| **Severe** | Distorted | Impaired thinking, Confusion, Disorientation | Excessive, Maladaptive | Relaxation, Less Stimuli, Presence, Listening | IM Anxiolytic |
| **Panic** | Disorganized | Immobilization, Mute/Hysterical, Irrational, Overwhelmed (Suicidal), Potential Hallucination/Delusion | Dysfunctional | Safety, Less Stimuli, Presence (judicious touch) | N/A |
## Underlying Causes of Anxiety
1. **Interpersonal Factors**: fear of interpersonal rejection; traumatic or dysfunctional relationships.
2. **Behavioral Factors**: exposure to early negative life circumstances and learned responses to frustration.
3. **Psychoanalytic Factor**: conflicts between the [[Id and the Superego]].
___
# Adaptation and Coping Mechanisms
"**Adaptation**" is the **physical or behavioral characteristic** of an organism that helps an organism to **survive better in the surrounding environment**. Adaptation occurs in various levels:
- **Adaptive**: facing and finding solutions to situations
- **Less Adaptive**: temporary use of defense mechanisms
- **Maladaptive**: excessive use of defense mechanisms
- **Dysfunctional**: ineffective use of defense mechanisms; results in negative ADL and social impact.

"**Coping**" is any effort done to reduce stress responses. It may be **constructive**; task-oriented (direct problem solving) or defense-oriented (regulate stress via defense mechanisms), or **destructive**, where the individual often avoid the problem.

"**Defense Mechanisms**" also known as "**ego defense mechanisms**" or "**protective defenses**" are **patterns of behavior or thought utilized to protect oneself** from threatening internal or external aspects. It allows an individual to **maintain control, safety, self-esteem, lessen discomfort, cope with stress, and decrease anxiety**.
## Normal and Adaptive Mechanism
Persons who effectively utilize these mechanisms are **perceived as virtuous**. These mechanisms enhance the individual's feeling of mastery and pleasure.
- **Anticipation**: planning ahead for realistic expectations.
- **Compensation**: making up for imagined or actual handicaps or deficiency.
- **Compromise**: give-and-take dynamics; often seen in relationships.
- **Sublimation**: channeling socially unacceptable behavior to a socially acceptable one. It is the **most constructive defense mechanism**.
- **Humor**: seeing the lighter side of the situation.
## Narcissistic Defense Mechanism
The most **primitive** mechanism often utilized by children. These mechanisms eliminate the need to cope with **reality**.
- **Denial**: **refusal to acknowledge reality**.
- **Projection**: **blaming others** for unacceptable deeds or thoughts.
- **Fantasy**: gratification of wishes through **imagination**.
## Immature Defense Mechanism
Often seen in **adolescents** and some **non-psychotic individuals**; it **lessens distress and anxiety-provoking situations**. Excessive use of these defenses are seen as **socially undesirable** (immature, difficulty, out-of-touch).
- **Conversion**: transferring **emotional conflict into physical symptoms**.
- **Malingering**: **fabrication of ailments**.
- **Fixation**: [[psychosocial development]] ceases to advance.
- **Regression**: returning to **previous developmental stages**.
- **Identification**: unconscious attempts to **change oneself as another, admired person**.
- **Introjection**: sub-type of identification in which **a person incorporates traits or values of other individuals into themselves**.
- **Intellectualization**: **excessive reasoning** to obscure feelings.
- **Suppression**: **forgetting** thoughts or feelings voluntarily.
- **Isolation**: **blocking feelings** associated with unpleasant experiences; **may be physical or emotional**.
- **Symbolism**: conscious use of an alternate idea or object to represent another idea or object.
## Neurotic Defense Mechanisms
Often seen in **obsessive-compulsive**, **hysterical individuals** and adults under stress. These are **advantageous** in short-term coping situations, but can cause **long-term problems in relationships and life** if used as a primary coping method.
- **Displacement**: **releasing anger** in a **less threatening** way.
- **Dissociation**: **blocking off events** from the conscious mind e.g. amnesia.
- **Substitution**: **replacing original goals** or desires with something else.
- **Rationalization**: **justification of behavior** to make them acceptable.
- **Reaction Formation**: reacting in a way that is **opposite of what is felt**.
- **Repression**: **involuntary forgetfulness** of unacceptable thoughts.
- **Undoing**: engaging in **behaviors opposite of previous unacceptable actions**.
___
# Crisis
When events [[#Underlying Causes of Anxiety|causing anxiety]] becomes **overwhelming** and **usual coping patterns become suspended**. These may involve man-made and natural disasters, interpersonal events, traumatic experiences, etc.
1. **Maturational Crisis**: occuring as a normal part of growth and development e.g. leaving home for the first time, completing school, marriage, childbirth and rearing, beginning a career, etc. **The successful resolution of these crises result in positive character development**.
2. **Situational Crisis**: **sudden or unpredicted events that threaten an individual's integrity** (physical, emotional, societal, economic, etc.).
3. **Adventitious Crisis**: **unexpected unusual events** that can affect an individual or a multitude of people; a **social crisis** e.g. natural disasters; societal injustices like racism, kidnapping, terrorism; violent crimes.
## Stages of Crisis
1. **Denial**: an initial reaction of shock or disbelief.
2. **Increased Tension**: the recognition of the crisis; initial functioning remains adequate.
3. **Disorganization**: preoccupation with the crisis affects the individual's functioning.
4. **Attempts to Reorganize**: the utilization of old and new coping mechanisms.