---
title: Self-Awareness
tags:
  - B317
description: The understanding of another human being begins with understanding of the self.
---
>[!QUOTE] Jones & Learning, 2005
>Understanding of another human being begins with understanding of the self.

___
"**Know Thyself**" is a basic tenet of psychiatric-mental health nursing. **Understanding the self** is an on-going process of becoming aware of one's self where individuals **willingly identify, process, and store information about themselves** (**self-evaluation**). It allows an individual to differentiate their values, beliefs, personal boundaries, weaknesses, and strengths. This in turn, allows one to **understand how they can affect others**.
- Self-awareness is not only knowing what their **mood** is, but also how one **feels about their mood**.
- In the context of a nurse, having self-awareness allows them to **understand variances between values and beliefs of different individuals**; for mental health professionals to mark **ego boundaries**, where their beliefs end and other individuals' beliefs start. It also helps them be **more conscious of the use of their self**, allowing them to use therapeutic interventions, avoiding awkwardness and spontaneity. 
- Improves **self-knowledge or acceptance** (ergo self-confidence and self-esteem), **self-regulation or control** (better decision-making), **self-improvement or development**, and **inferences** about **other individual's mental states**.
# Self-Awareness Development Techniques
1. **Journaling**: the **reflection on one's experiences through documentation** (outside of therapy). It allows for better insight.
2. **Bibliotherapy**: the use of **self-help books** (ideally through therapist recommendations).
3. **Manifesto**: a description of an individual's **core values and beliefs**, **principles**, and **philosophy** on life. It may also act as **a call to action**.
4. **Bucket List**: aiding in the **identification of personal and professional goals**. **Daily routines can lead to stagnation** and the loss of conscious thought about long-term goals and desires.
5. **Personality Typing**: understanding one's personality can aid in understanding differences between the individual's behaviors and attitudes compared to others. This may also aid in recognizing your own emotions
6. **Autobiography**: how would you narrate your life to someone else?
7. **Reflection**: some insight to yourself through guided questioning
	- What are your strengths and weaknesses? List three of each.
	- What do you value the most?
	- Differentiate between what one can or cannot do by themselves?
	- What feelings are you more aware of experiencing, as compared to others?
	- What are your triggers i.e. people and situations that bring forth negative emotions?
	- How do you respond under stress?
	- How do your different roles make you feel? e.g. as a student, sibling, parent, significant other, etc.