---
title: Mental Status Examination
tags:
  - B317
description: The sum total of the examiner's observations and impressions of the psychiatric patient at the time of the interview. Mental status can change from hour to hour.
---
# Overview
The **sum total** of the examiner's **observations and impressions of the psychiatric patient** at the time of the interview. Various methods and techniques exist to allow for examination even for incoherent, apprehensive, or disabled patients. **Mental status can change from hour to hour**.
1. **Appearance**:
	- Overt **behavior**
	- **Attitude**
		- Cooperative, friendly, attentive, interested, frank, seductive, defensive, contemptuous (scornful), perplexed (unsure), apathetic (uninterested), hostile, playful, ingratiating (attempting to gain favor), evasive or guarded, among many other **adjectives**.
	- **Speech**
		- **Quantity**: talkative, taciturn, normal, **alogia**, etc.
		- **Rate of Production**: rapid, slow, pressured (hard to interrupt), emotional, monotonous, mumbled, etc.
		- **Quality**: stuttering, tics, **dysprosody**, etc.
	- **Psychomotor** Agitation
		- **Mood**
			- Depressed, anxious, angry, expansive, euphoric, perplexed.
		- **Affect**
			- Dysphoric, Euthymic, Anxious, Elevated/Euphoric, Labile
			- Normal, Constricted, Blunted, Flattened
2. **Thinking**
	- **Thought Process**/**Form** (Disorganized Thought; Flight of Ideas, Associative Looseness, Perseveration Phenomenon, etc.)
	- **Thought Content** (Illusions, Delusions, Hallucinations)
	- Perceptions
2. **Sensorium**
	- **Alertness**: Clouding ("Clouded Sensorium"), Somnolence (Excessive Drowsiness), Stupor, Coma, Lethargy, Alertness
	- **Orientation** (Person, Place, Time, Situation)
	- Concentration
	- **Memory**: immediate (minutes), recent (days), recent past (months), remote (distant past)
	- Calculations
	- Fund of Knowledge
	- Abstract Reasoning
3. **Insight/Intellect**
	- Judgement
	- Cognition: "intact"
___
# Appearance
The patient's **body type**, **posture**, **poise**, **clothes**, **grooming**, **hair**, **nails**, etc. **qualitative descriptions** for appearance include:
- Healthy, sickly, ill, at ease, older or younger than stated age, disheveled, child-like, bizarre
- Signs of anxiety are noted: moist hands, perspiring forehead, tense posture, and wide eyes.
## Example
The patient is a **23 year old male** who **appears his age**. There is **poor grooming and personal hygiene evidenced by foul body odor** and **long unkempt hair**. The patient is wearing a **worn T-shirt** with an **odd shield-like symbol**. It appears to be related to the patient's **delusion** of **needing 'antivirus' protection** for mind-readers.
## Attitude
- Cooperative, friendly, attentive, interested, frank, seductive, defensive, contemptuous (scornful), perplexed (unsure), apathetic (uninterested), hostile, playful, ingratiating (attempting to gain favor), evasive or guarded, among many other **adjectives**.
- Record established **level of rapport**.
- Note an **apathetic and/or non-cooperative attitude** towards the examiner. 
## Speech
- **Quantity**: talkative, garrulous (excessively talkative), voluble (continuous speech), taciturn (untalkative), non-spontaneous (only answers in prepared speech), normally responsive to cues from the interviewer, **alogia** (poverty of speech; found in [[schizophrenia]])
- **Rate of Production**: rapid, slow, pressured (hard to interrupt), hesitant, emotional, dramatic, monotonous, loud, whispered, slurred, staccato (shortened syllables/words production), mumbled
- **Quality**: speech impairments such as stuttering, tics e.g. from [[Tourette Syndrome]], **dysprosody** (unusual speech rhythm/intonation), etc.
## Behavior and Psychomotor Activity
- Mannerisms, tics, gestures, twitches, stereotyped behavior, echopraxia, hyperactivity, agitation, combativeness, flexibility, rigidity, gait, agility.
- Movements which may result from **drug side effects** e.g. [[tardive dyskinesia]], [[extrapyramidal symptoms]], or **tremors**.
- **Restlessness**, **wringing of hands**, **pacing**, among other physical manifestations.
- **Psychomotor retardation** or **generalized slowing** of body movements.
- Describe any **aimless, purposeless activity**.
## Mood
- A **pervasive and sustained emotion that colors a person's perception of the world**. It often refers to the patient's **self-reported mood**. It should involve the **depth**, **intensity**, **duration**, and **fluctuations** (whether labile or stable) of the individual's mood, and **whether or not their mood was remarked voluntarily or was it necessary to ask first**?
- Depressed, despairing, irritable, anxious, angry, expansive, euphoric, empty, guilty, hopeless, futile, self-contemptuous, frightened, and perplexed.
## Affect
- The **present emotional responsiveness** inferred from **facial expression and expressive behaviors**.
- **Quality**: **dysphoric** (e.g. in [[depression]]), **euthymic** (normal state), **anxious**, **elevated**/**euphoric** (e.g. in [[mania]]), **flat** (e.g. in [[schizophrenia]]), **labile** (easily changed), and **irritable**.
- **Congruency**: the appropriateness of the affect in relation to the mood e.g.
	- [[#Thought Content|Persecutory delusions]] should result in being upset or afraid
	- Flattened affect when speaking about murderous impulses in schizophrenic patients
- **Range**: normal, **constricted** (reduced range of expression), **blunted** (decreased intensity of emotional expression), or **flat** (severe reduction or absence of emotional expression i.e. monotony, immobile facial expressions).
>[!EXAMPLE] Appearance/Behavior
>The patient is an 18 year old male who **looks his stated age**, 163 cm tall, wearing a plain black shirt with shorts and slippers. He has black hair and dark brown eyes, which **appear sunken and drowsy**. He has **noticeable bruises on the knuckles**, **arms**, and **presence of scars on the face**. The client has **difficulty communicating** and **did not maintain eye contact** during NPI. He has a **blunt affect** and manifested **alogia**. He also showed signs of **aggressive** and **impulsive behavior**.

___
# Thinking
## Perception
Disturbances such as illusions, hallucinations, and delusions may be experiences in reference to the self or the environment. This may also involve **depersonalization** and **derealization**.
- May be **inferred when the patient respond to their internal stimuli**.
- Describe **the sensory system involved** in the disturbance (visual, olfactory, gustatory, auditory, tactile) and **the content of the experience**.
## Thought
Thought is divided into the **form** or **process** (the production and associations used in thought) which may be **logical**, **illogical**, or even **incomprehensible** and its **content** (ideas, beliefs, preoccupations, obsessions).
### Thought Form/Process
- **Flight of Ideas**: extreme rapid thinking resulting to **quickly changing courses in conversation** e.g. in **mania**.
- **Associative Looseness**: "**Derailment***", the **lack of coherence** in conversation and ideas e.g. in **schizophrenia**.
- **Tangentiality**: appropriate answer in relation to the topic, not as an answer to questions.
- **Circumstantiality**: Overinclusion of trivial or irrelevant details that impede the sense of getting to the point.
- **Word Salad**: incoherent or incomprehensible connections of thoughts (most severe form of disorganized thought)
- **Clang Association**: the use of rhyming words in speech (also of assonance and consonance)
- **Neologisms**: the creation of new words or phrases (or even conventional words) in idiosyncratic ways.
- **Perseveration Phenomenon**: the repetition of words or phrases in sentences, often out of context.
- **Thought-Blocking**: interruption of thoughts before an idea is completed. It may manifest as forgetting what the patient was just talking about.
- Do the patient's replies **answer the questions asked to an appropriate degree**?
- Does the patient have the capacity for **goal-directed** thinking?
- Is there a clear **cause-and-effect relation** in the patient's explanations?
### Thought Content
Disturbance of thought content would result in **delusions**, **preoccupations** (may involve their illness), **obsessions**, **compulsions**, **phobias**, **plans**, **intentions**, **hypochondriacal symptoms**, and **specific antisocial urges**.
- **Delusions**: fixed, false beliefs. This may be **mood congruent** or **mood incongruent**. 
	- **Describe content** and **evaluate its organization**. Identify the patients' **conviction about the delusion's validity**.
	- **External Control Delusions**: **thought insertion**, similar to introjection; **thought withdrawal**, where one believes their thoughts are being taken from them (may result in thought blocking); **thought broadcasting**, where one believes their thoughts are being projected to others.
	- **Persecutory Delusions**: false beliefs that one is about to be harmed or being mistreated by others in some way.
	- **Paranoid Delusions**: a weaker form of persecutory delusions that may be still be amended by opposing evidence.
	- **Grandiose Delusions**: unfounded beliefs of special powers, wealth, missions, or identity.
	- **Jealous Delusions**: delusions of significant others being unfaithful or traitorous.
	- **Somatic Delusions**: delusions related to the body of the individual.
	- **Guilty Delusions**: unwarranted or extreme feelings of remorse of doing something wrong.
	- **Nihilistic Delusions**: delusions of being dead, decomposed or annihilated, having lost one's own internal organs or even not existing entirely as a human being. It may also relate to delusions of future events that cause those things, such as Armageddon.
	- **Erotic Delusions**: (erotomania) a false belief that one is romantically loved by another (often public figures or those in a higher position).
	- **Ideas of Reference Delusions**: the false belief that unrelated things are directly related to the individual; that their thoughts caused something to happen.
	- **Ideas of Influence Delusions**: the false belief that unrelated things are exerting an influence over the individual.
- Does the patient have thoughts of harm to self (**suicidal ideation**) or to others? Have they formulated plans (**suicidal planning**)?
>[!EXAMPLE] Thinking
>The patient only **talked minimally** and showed signs of **alogia** (responding "*whatever*", or "*nothing*" to most questions). **Unable to maintain a linear train of thought** with **apparent disorganization** or **irrational connections** during expression. He keeps blaming those around him for not providing him support. He **denied any thoughts of suicide and hallucinations**. He has **impaired thought content** of **what is right and wrong**; the patient believes stealing is not wrong as it alleviates his hunger.

___
# Sensorium
## Level of Consciousness
- Clouding, Somnolence, Stupor, Coma, Lethargy, Alertness
## Orientation
Awareness or knowledge of the varying levels of orientation: **person**, the self e.g. the ability to recall one's own name, only lost in very severe dementia or during psychosis; **place**, the ability to name where one's location or at least their city or country; **time** includes the date (may one or two days as room for error), day of the week, year, and season; **situation** is the ability to describe *global circumstances* e.g. their condition and the context of their inpatient status.
- **Three Spheres**: Person, Time, Place (in order)
- **Four Spheres**: Person, Time, Place, Situation
>[!EXAMPLE] Example
>The patient is **oriented to the three spheres**. He stated **he was incarcerated in a psychiatric facility** (place). He was **aware with whom he interacted with** as he was able to recall the name of the student nurse who looked after him but did not remember all of them. He was also **time-oriented**, as he was able to tell the time and date of the day.
## Levels of Memory
- **Immediate Memory**: recalling perceived stimuli within **seconds to minutes**. 
- **Recent Memory**: recalling perceived stimuli within the past **few days**. [[Anterograde Amnesia]]
- **Recent Past Memory**: recalling perceived stimuli within the past **few months**.
- **Remote Memory**: recalling perceived stimuli in the **distant past**. [[Retrograde Amnesia]]
>[!EXAMPLE] Memory
>The patient **can remember recent events**. He was able to report on his activities from the previous day but **with minimal use of words**. His **long-term memory is intact** and he can recall the day that they transferred here in Manila. During my interview, he was able to remember the day that his father was arrested. He was able to able to remember his experiences at the warzone in Isabela, Basilan.

___
# Insight/Intellect
Insight is the **degree of awareness a patient has about their state of illness**. They may exhibit **complete denial** of their situation (i.e. complete denial of illness), acknowledge it but **place the blame on other factors**, or ascribe it to **something unknown or mysterious** in themselves.
## Levels of Insight
1. **Complete denial of illness**
2. **Slight awareness and simultaneous denial** of being sick and needing help.
3. **Awareness of illness but blaming external or organic factors**.
4. **Awareness of illness but blaming something unknown** in the patient.
5. **Intellectual**: **admission of illness**, their thoughts, and its causal relationship with failure in societal roles, yet **without proper application of this knowledge in future experiences**.
6. **True Emotional Insight**: emotional awareness of internal motives and feelings, and significant others. This may result in basic changes in behavior.
## Cognition
Often not extensively reported (e.g. "intact cognition"), but is inferred from the interview. If indicated, a **Mini-Cog** test may be done.
- **Test for orientation**. Make sure the patient is paying attention to you.
- **3-Word Recall Test**:
	- **Choose three words** (e.g. Banana, Sunrise, Chair), and let the patient repeat them (if they can't, continue to clock drawing).
	- Afterwards, have them **draw a clock**. The sheet of paper may already have a circle drawn in, or not. Have them write all the numbers, and ask them to draw the hands pointing to an arbitrary time (e.g. 10:30).
	- After they are done, ask them to **recall the three words**.
- **Scoring**: **one point for each word recalled** and **two points for a normal clock**, and **no points for an abnormal clock** (wrong clock hands, missing/misplaced numbers)
	- **0 - 2**: a higher likelihood of clinically important cognitive impairment.
	- **3 - 5**: lower likelihood of clinically important cognitive impairment.
Test for concentration:
- **Serial Sevens**: ask the patient to subtract 7 continuously from 100.
- **Backward Spelling**: ask the patient to spell **five-letter words** backwards.

If, after the test, impairment is suspected, an [[Mini Mental State Examination|MMSE]] may be performed. This test among other tests may be used to test memory, calculations, fund of knowledge, and abstract reasoning.

>[!EXAMPLE] Intellect/Insight
> During the **NPI**, when the client was asked to solve arithmetic (5 times 3), they answered 2. However, when asked to try again, they used their fingers and answered 15; **able to answer basic math problems with sufficient time** to respond. Counting backwards by 3 from 20 also required ample time, but was done. When asked about their condition, **denial** of the illness and  **avoidance coping** were displayed: "*I barely steal anything.*"

>[!EXAMPLE] Cognition
>Due to **mental incapacity** or **neurological disorder**, the patient's cognitive ability **may be impaired**. However, during the therapeutic activities, the client was **participative** but at times was **stubborn**. The client was **able to understand and follow instructions** in our therapeutic activities. He **needed sufficient time to provide answers** to my questions. He has **little to no difficulty remembering previous therapeutic activities**.
## Judgment
The patient's capability for **social judgment**; the ability to **predict or understand the outcomes of one's behaviors**. If impaired, **safety issues arise**. This is an important aspect of the MSE.
___
# Sample MSE
>[!EXAMPLE] Mania
> **Mania**: Ms. Joanna Doe is a 34 year old female who **appears to be her stated age**. Appearance is remarkable for wearing revealing and likely designer clothes with excessive makeup. Behavior is **hyperactive** and **agitated** at times. **Speech** is **pressured** and with **an increased rate**, often **loudly**. Mood is **described as** '**happy and on top of the world**' and affect is **elevated** and **euphoric**; **not appropriate to the situation**. She is also **irritable** in parts and **quite labile**. Her thought process is **disorganized** with apparent **flight of ideas** connected to **grandiose delusional themes**. There is **no suicidal** or **homicidal ideation**. Thought content includes **grandiose delusional themes**. Perception appears **normal**. Insight is **poor**. Judgment is **poor**; she wishes to fly to Milan and exercises poor financial decisions.