---
tags:
  - B317
  - INC
title: Process Recording
description: The method by which a nurse records all of the communication, both verbal and nonverbal, during an interview with a patient.
draft: true
---
Nurses or student nurses record all the communication, both verbal and non-verbal, spoken and observed during his or her interview with the patient. This is done to:
- Provide means of self-evaluation for communication patterns and their effect on the client.
- This analysis augments the nurse's ability to increase awareness of feelings, values, expectations, and assumptions.
___
# Process Recording Sample Form
- **Name of Student**, **Group Number**, **Agency**, **Area**
- **Name of Client** (initials only), **Age**, **Sex**, **Race**
- **Phase of NPI** (refer to [[B317/03-4#Phases of Therapeutic Relationships|these phases]]), **Date of NPI**, **Medical Diagnosis**
- **Objectives of the NPI** e.g. establish rapport, trust, gather medical/psychiatric history, assess psychosocial problems and mental health status
<center>
<table>
	<tr>
		<th style="text-align: center;" colspan=2>Nurse</th>
		<th style="text-align: center;" rowspan=2>Techniques Used</th>
		<th style="text-align: center;" colspan=2>Patient</th>
		<th style="text-align: center;" rowspan=2>Analysis</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<th>Verbal</th>
		<th>Non-Verbal</th>
		<th>Verbal</th>
		<th>Non-Verbal</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Good morning, Mr. Cruz.</td>
		<td>Seated in the bench in a relax posture, directly facing the patient, leaning forward toward the patient while maintaining eye contact with him.</td>
		<td>Giving recognition. This is to acknowledge the patient and establish rapport</td>
		<td>Good morning.</td>
		<td>Seated in the opposite bench facing the student nurse with crossed arms and legs. Looked down the floor and glance at the student nurse once in awhile but not directly through her eyes</td>
		<td>The patient is aloof, shy and does not maintain eye to eye contact. He is responsive to queries but provided limited information to questions being asked.</td>
	</tr>
</table>
</center>
Following the form is an evaluation of the outcomes of the goals set.