---
tags:
  - B317
title: Antimanics
description: Drugs that normalize the re-uptake of serotonin, norepinephrone, dopamine, and acetylcholine. These are used for manic period of those with bipolar disorder, prevention of recurrent episodes of mania and depression, and schizo-affective disorder.
---
Drugs that normalize the re-uptake of serotonin, norepinephrone, dopamine, and acetylcholine. These are used for:
- Manic period of those with bipolar disorder
- Prevention of recurrent episodes of mania and depression
- [[B317/05-6|Schizo-affective disorder]]
___
# Contraindications
Lithium levels, even at therapeutic ranges (0.6 - 1.2 mEq/L) may result in toxicity. It should be **checked every two to three days during the first month of therapy, then weekly and monthly or more** when stable.
1. **Hypersensitivity response to Lithium**
2. **Renal Disease**
3. **Thyroid Disease**
___
# Side Effects
1. Common:
	- **GIT Effects**: nausea, anorexia, diarrhea
	- **Weight Gain**
	- A "**metallic taste**"
	- **Fatigue and lethargy**
	- **Polyuria**
	- **Tremors**
2. Serious:
	- **Thyroid Impairment**: thyroid function studies are done every 3 to 6 months for clients on long-term lithium therapy.
	- **Renal Impairment**
3. Toxic:
	- Muscle Weakness
	- Nausea
	- Slurred Speech
	- Agitation, Ataxia
	- Vomiting
	- Diarrhea, Drowsiness
4. Severely Toxic:
	- Coma
	- Altered Level of Consciousness
	- Arrhythmia
	- Seizure
	- Stupor
	- Spastic Muscles
	- Hypotension
	- Renal Failure
- **Treatment of Lithium Toxicity**: monitor **lithium levels**, **VS**, **electrolytes**, **BUN and Creatinine** (renal function). Withhold any further doses. Prepare for **hemodialysis** if indicated for severe toxicity.
- **Prevention of Lithium Toxicity**:
	- **Regular appointments for blood studies** should be held. Advise the patient about the signs of and to report for toxicity.
	- Maintain **adequate fluid and electrolytes** (sodium; 2g/d) intake. 
	- **Restrict caffeine intake**.
	- Be cautious of patients who have **diarrhea**, **polyuria**, **vomiting**, **diaphoresis**, and a **low salt diet** as these may increase incidence of lithium toxicity.