---
tags:
  - B317
title: Abnormal Involuntary Movement Scale (AIMS) Examination
description: A screening test for symptoms of movement disorders.
aliases:
  - AIMS
---
A screening test for **symptoms of movement disorders**. The client is **observed in several positions, and severity of symptoms** are rated from 0 to 4, with 0 as absent and 4 as severe. It may be administered ever 3 to 6 months.
___
# Procedure
Indicate the client identifier, date, and examiner. Before or after the procedure, **observe the client unobtrusively at rest** e.g. while in the waiting room.
- A **chair is required** for the examination. It should be hard and have no arms.
- Ask the client about **any items** in their mouth: gum, candy; ask them to remove it.
- Ask the client about the use of **dentures** and if they bother the client.
- Ask the client about **if they notice movements** of their mouth, face, hands, or feet. If they do, ask for specification and description.

1. Have the client sit in a chair with their **hands on their knees**, with **legs slightly apart**. Keep their **feet flat on the floor**. Observe for **any movements**.
2. Ask the client to sit with their **hands hanging unsupported**. For men, between the legs. For women with dresses, over the knees. Observe **hands and other body areas**.
3. Ask the client to **protrude the tongue**. Observe abnormalities of **tongue movements**. **Perform twice**.
4. Ask the client to **tap the thumb with each finger as rapidly as possible** for 10 to 15 seconds, one hand at a time. Observe **facial and leg movements**.
5. **Flex and extend the client's arms**, one at a time.
6. Ask the client to stand up. Observe in profile, all body areas, hips included.
7. Ask the client to **extend both arms outstretched in front with palms down**. Observe the **trunk, legs, and mouth**.
8. Have the client **walk a few paces, turn, and walk back to the chair**. Observe their **hands and gait**. **Perform twice**.