---
tags:
  - B317
title: Delusional Disorders
description: Previously known as the "paranoid disorder", it is a serious psychotic mental disorder. Differentiation of reality from delusion is difficult, as mistaken perceptions or experiences may be simple and realistic.
date: 2024-01-01
---
Formerly called as the "Paranoid Disorder", it is a serious psychotic mental disorder. **Differentiation of false perceptions and experiences from reality is difficult with both bizarre and non-bizarre, realistic delusions may occur**. People with this disorder often can continue to socialize and function normally, **generally not behaving in an obviously odd or bizarre manner**. However, preoccupation with their delusions may lead to disruption of their lives.
- Most commonly occurs from **middle to late life**, **more often in women than men**.
___
# Types of Delusion
1. **Erotomanic Delusions**: "*The nurse is in love with me*."; they may try to contact others following this thought. It may lead to stalking behavior, as the subjects to this delusion are often important or influential people.
2. **Grandiose Delusions**: an over-inflated sense of worth, power, knowledge, or identity. They may believe they are a great talent or have discover something important.
3. **Jealous Delusions**: "*He's cheating on me!*"; a delusion of unfaithfulness of significant others.
4. **Persecutory Delusions**: "*I'm going to be killed.*"; a delusion of being threatened, stalked, or otherwise harmed. This may result to repeated use of emergency services.
5. **Somatic Delusions**: "My leg is gone!"; delusions that affect the body.
6. **Mixed Delusions**
9. **Nihilistic Delusions**: beliefs that the self is dysfunctional, rotting away, disfigured, misshapen; negative beliefs about the world ("The world is ending tomorrow.")
10. **Referential Delusions**: also known as **Ideas of Reference**, involving the belief that external events are somehow related to the client e.g. "The President was speaking to me at his speech."
11. **Sexual Delusions**: beliefs that one's sexual behavior is malicious and/or broadcast e.g. "I'm a rapist."