---
tags:
  - B317
description: 
title: Interdisciplinary Mental Health Team Collaboration
date: 2024-01-01
---
# Members of the Interdisciplinary Team
1. **Pharmacist**: used when medications, side effects, and interactions with non-psychiatric medications are complex, or involve refractory symptoms.
2. **Psychiatrist**: a **physician certified in psychiatry** by their respective board of psychiatry. In America, this includes a 3-year residency, 2 years of clinical practice, and completion of an examination. They **diagnose mental disorders and prescribe medical treatments**.
3. **Psychologist**: an individual with a **doctorate clinical psychology** and is prepared to **practice therapy, conduct research, and interpret psychological tests**. They may participate in **designing therapy programs** for groups of individuals.
4. **Psychiatric Nurse**: a nurse experienced in working with clients with psychiatric disorders after graduation from an accredited program of nursing and completion of the licensure examination. They should have a solid foundation in holistic health care.
	- Evaluation of effectiveness of medical treatment, especially for medications
	- Obtaining a **master's degree** in mental health can classify a nurse as **clinical specialists** or licensed as **advanced practitioners**.
5. **Psychiatric Social Worker**: often prepared at the master's level, they practice therapy and hold the primary responsibility for working with families, community support, and referral.
6. **Occupational Therapist**: either through an associate degree (certified occupational therapy assistant) or a baccalaureate degree (certified occupational therapist), individuals may **focus on the functional abilities of the client and ways to improve client functioning, such as working with arts and crafts and focusing on psychomotor skills**.
7. **Recreation Therapist**: may be through experience or a baccalaureate degree; these therapists **help the client achieve a balance of work and play in life, providing activities that promote the constructive use of leisure or unstructured time**.
8. **Vocational Rehabilitation Specialist**: may be through baccalaureate or master's level, with varying levels of autonomy and program supervision based on education. This involves the **determination of clients' interests and abilities, and matching them with vocational choices**. Clients are assisted in **job-seeking**, **job-retention**, as well as in **pursuit of further education**, if needed and desired.
___
# Core Skills as an Effective Member
1. **Interpersonal Skills**: tolerance, patience, understanding
2. **Humanity**: warmth, acceptance, empathy, genuineness, and a nonjudgmental attitude.
3. **Knowledge**: mental disorders, symptoms, and behaviors. 
4. **Communication Skills**
5. **Personal Qualities**: consistency, assertiveness, and problem-solving abilities.
6. **Teamwork Skills**: collaboration, sharing, and integrating 
7. **Risk Assessment and Management Skill**

There are four other well-defined and widely used traditional nursing care delivery systems:
1. **Functional Nursing** is a task-oriented modality, where particular nursing functions are assigned to each nursing staff. **The team leader identifies tasks to be done in a shift, and delegates the tasks among the members, assigning tasks relevant to each nursing specialty of the members**. This modality has the advantage of being efficient in handling **a large number of clients**.
2. **Team Nursing** is a care model utilizing a group of people, both professional and non-professional, led by a knowledgeable nurse (team leader), including RNs, LPNs, and NAs. They work together to **identify, plan, implement, and evaluate comprehensive client-centered care**. The entire group **works together toward a common goal, providing qualitative, comprehensive nursing care**.
3. **Primary Nursing**: a system of nursing care delivery which emphasizes **continuity of care, responsibility, and acceptance** by having one RN, often teamed with a LPN and/or NA who, together, provide complete care for a group of patients throughout their stay in a hospital unit or department. This focuses on the **therapeutic relationship between a patient and a nurse who assumes responsibility for a patient's plan of care** for their length of stay in a particular area. The patient knows their nurse, and the nurse can communicate the patient's needs to the entire health team.
4. **Patient-Centered Care**, also known as "**Total Patient Care**", often used in the ICU and PACU. The nurse is fully responsible for **organizing, planning, and performing all aspects of nursing care**. This requires a high degree of **autonomy, clear lines of responsibility and accountability, holistic patient care, and unfragmented care**.
___
# Principles of PMHN Collaboration
**Psychiatric-Mental Health Nurses** provide collaborative care. **The ability to get both physical and mental health care at a familiar location** is comfortable to patients and reduces duplicate assessments. **Increase patient engagement** oftentimes results in a better health care experience and improved patient outcomes.
## Inter-agency and Intra-agency
**Interagency Care** is a system of care between agencies and families joining together for the purpose of interdependent problem solving that focuses on improving services to children and families. **Intra-agency Care** involve agreements between two or more agencies within the DHHS.
## Multidisciplinary
There are **many competencies** required for implementation of psychiatric rehabilitation. Expert contributions of professionals and paraprofessionals who can individualize **a comprehensive array of evidence-based services with competency, consistency, continuity, coordination, collaboration, and fidelity**. It is important to involve clients, their relatives, and other supporters in setting personally relevant life goals. These teams are not limited to office-bound or hospital-bound clinicians. These include mobile educators, personal coaches, advocates, and community organizers.
## Interpersonal Relationships in a Team
**Interpersonal Relationships** are the cornerstone of psychiatric nursing. Skillful management of interpersonal relationships is essential to psychiatric-mental health nursing.
- **Observation, assessment, communication, and evaluation skills** serve as the foundation for an interpersonal relationship.
- The most important skill is **a basic understanding of self and what that individual brings to the relationship**.
- **Communication skill, both verbal and nonverbal** is the second most important.

The cornerstone of all other components of nursing is **a relationship with nursing**. It is a primary goal regardless of the patient's health status, ranging from well individuals living in the community to patients who are critically or terminally ill. **The relationship is reflected and integrated into the plan of care for any patient**. There are two **nursing theorists** that shaped psychiatric nursing practice:
1. **Hildegard Peplau**, the author of "**Interpersonal Relations in Nursing**" in 1952, and **Interpersonal Techniques: The Crux of Psychiatric Nursing** in 1962, describing the therapeutic nurse-client relationship with its phases and tasks, and wrote extensively about [[anxiety]].
2. **June Mellow** is a psychiatric nursing theories who developed the **client-centered psychiatric nursing approach**, focusing on the client's psychosocial needs and strengths.
___
# Conflict Resolution
A conflict in a relationship (disagreements, arguments) can be extremely stressful, but **may also result in a positive outcome** by surfacing issues that require discussion. There are 9 steps in conflict solution (*Indeed Editorial Team*):
1. **Understand the conflict**
2. **Explore alternatives**
3. **Find a private, neutral place**
4. **Communicate both sides**: be an active listener. Rephrase statements in your own words; "*So you're saying that... Did I understand you correctly?*". **Avoid forming assumptions**, keep an open mind, ask questions, and gather information to understand each position.
5. **Be aware of body language**: maintain eye contact, be conscious of your expression, relax your neck and shoulders, and use a neutral tone with moderate speed and volume. Avoid "absolute" words such as "always" or "never".
6. **Identify a common goal**
7. **Use a third-party mediator**
8. **Brainstorm solutions**
9. **Agree on a plan of action**