---
title: Hepatitis
tags:
  - MS
description: The viral infectious widespread inflammation of the liver parenchyma. Degeneration and death of the hepatic cells results in liver cell damage, resulting in the development of kupffer cells.
date: 2024-01-01
---
Inflammation of the liver parenchyma can be caused by three main factors: **immunologic damage**, **infections** (viruses, bacteria, fungi, protozoa), and **toxicity** (alcohol, drugs, poisons, chemicals). The common form of hepatitis is viral, infectious, and widespread. Chronic inflammation of the liver results in **degeneration and necrosis**, which leads to the proliferation and enlargement of the phagocytic and pinocytic [[ANPH/13#Functions of the Liver|kupffer cells]]. Inflammation also affects the **periportal areas**, which interrupt bile flow.
___
# Viral Hepatitis
## Hepatitis A
- **Transmission**: **RNA Virus** via the **fecal-oral route**.
- **Risks**: poor hygiene, **food contamination**, shellfish consumption. **Flies** may carry Hep. A.
- **Incubation Period**: 15 to 45 days.
## Hepatitis B
- **Transmission**: **DNA Virus** via all **body fluids**.
- **Risks**: sharing **needles** among IV drug abusers, **sexual contact**, healthcare workers **exposed to blood**.
- **Incubation Period**: 1 to 6 months.
- Develops into **chronic hepatitis** in **10% of adult** and **90% of neonatal** cases.
- Accounts for 50% of **fulminant hepatitis**.
## Hepatitis C
- **Transmission**: **RNA Virus** via **blood products**.
- **Risks**: sharing **needles** among IV drug abusers.
- **Incubation Period**: 2 to 6 months.
- Develops into **chronic hepatitis** in 70% to 80% of cases.
- It used to be the most common form (90%) of **transfusion hepatitis** before 1990.
## Hepatitis D
- **Transmission**: **RNA Virus** **simultaneous with** or **superimposed over** a **hepatitis B infection**. It resides in **blood products**. It cannot be contracted without hepatitis B.
- **Risks**: sharing **needles** among IV drug abusers, **hemophiliacs**.
- Hep. D produces the highest risk among acute viral hepatitis for **fulminant disease**. If it is obtained via a **superimposed infection** (*super-infection*), the risk if even greater.
## Hepatitis E
- **Transmission**: **fecal-oral route**.
- No **chronic form**
- **Fulminant disease** is mainly observed in pregnant patients.
# Assessment Findings
## Preicteric Stage (Prodromal Phase)
This lasts for approximately 1 week.
- **Anorexia** is the major manifestation.
- **N&V**, **Fatigue**, **Constipation or diarrhea**, **Weight Loss**
- **RUQ Discomfort**, Hepatomegaly, Splenomegaly, Lymphadenopathy.
## Icteric Stage
- Fatigue, weight-loss, **light-colored stools** (decreased bilirubin in the GIT), **dark urine** (increased bilirubin in urine)
- Hepatomegaly is now **tender**.
- **Jaundice**, Pruritus (subcutaneous bile salt deposition)
## Posticteric Stage
- Fatigue, an increased sense of well-being, and retrogressive hepatomegaly.
# Collaborative Management
- Relieve fatigue with promotion of **rest**.
- Advise client to use **soft toothbrushes** or **swabs**.
- Monitory **I**&**O** and **weight**
- **Vitamin K** as ordered (decreased clotting ability due to liver impairment)
- **Relaxing** baths, backrubs, fresh linens, and a quiet, dark environment.
- **Relieve pruritus**
	- Cool, light, **non-restrictive clothing**
	- Soft, dry, **clean bedding**
	- **Warm baths**
	- **Emollient** creams and lotions for dry skin
	- Cool environment
	- **Antihistamines** as ordered
	- **Diversion** with activities
## Dietary Management
- Well-balanced diet and fluids; encourage **fruit juices** and **non-carbonated beverages**. **3L/d** may be given for patients with fever and vomiting.
- **Fats** may need to be restricted (decreased bile in the GIT for fat emulsification)
- **Alcholic Beverages** should be **avoided** (toxic to the liver)