---
title: Hepatic Encephalopathy
tags:
  - MS
description: Encephalopathy as a result of ammonia accumulation secondary to liver dysfunction. The liver normally converts ammonia, a byproduct of protein metabolism, into urea which can then be excreted.
date: 2024-01-01
---
**Encephalopathy** as a result of **ammonia accumulation secondary to liver dysfunction**. The liver normally converts ammonia, a byproduct of protein metabolism, into urea which can then be excreted.
___
# Assessment Findings
- **Initial** manifestations: **behavioral and mental changes**.
- **Advanced** stage findings: **asterixis** (*flapping tremors*), **confusion**/**disorientation**, **delirium**/**hallucination**, and **fetor hepaticus** ("*breath of the dead*")
# Diagnostic Examinations
- **SGOT** or **AST** (aspartate amino transferese), **SGPT**, **LDH**, and **Alkaline Phosphatase** are increased.
- **Serum Bilirubin** is increased
- **Serum Albumin** is decreased
- **Hemoglobin** and **Hematocrit** is decreased.
- **Prothrombin Time** (PT) is decreased.
# Nursing Interventions
- **Provide bed rest** (with bathroom privileges) and comfort. Plan for gradual increase in activities with rest periods.
- **Relieve pruritus**: do not use soaps and detergents, bathe in tepid water, use of emollient lotions, the use of cool, light, non-restrictive clothing. **Keep nails short** to avoid harm from scratching. You may **apply cool, moist compresses to pruritic areas**.
- **Promote appropriate nutrition**: small frequent feedings;
	- **High-calorie**
	- **High CHO**
	- **Low/mod. CHON** (ammonia is a byproduct of protein metabolism)
	- **Low fat** (fat absorption is impaired due to implication of the biliary system)
	- **Vitamin therapy** (A, B Complex, C, D, K)
- **Prevent infection**:
	- Prevent **skin breakdown**
	- **Reverse Isolation** for patients with leukopenia (monitor patient **WBC**). Caretakers should observe proper hand washing technique.
	- Administer **diuretics** as ordered.
	- Administer **antibiotics** (Neomycin) as ordered.
- **Monitor and prevent bleeding** due to Vitamin K deficiency and [[MS/22-4|esophageal varices]] from portal hypertension.
	- Supplement **Vitamin K** as ordered.
- **Discharge Instructions**:
	- Avoid all **hepatotoxic substances** (alcohol, sedatives, opiates, etc.), other people with **upper respiratory tract infections**.
	- Avoid **straining during defecation**, **vigorous blowing of the nose**, and **coughing** to prevent episodes of bleeding (esophageal/gastric varices).
	- Education on **how to measure abdominal girth and weight**, recognition of **signs of recurring illness** (liver tenderness, progressing jaundice and fatigue, anorexia)
# Medical Management
- **Enema**
- **Paracentesis** for ascites.
- **Blood Transfusion**
- **Albumer** (albumin) **infusion**
## Pharmacologic Management
- **Hepatic Protectors**: **Essentiale**, **Godex**
- **Beta-Blockers
- **Diuretics** (?)
- **Vitamin K** to counteract deficiency and prevent bleeding.
- **Antibiotics** (Neomycin)
- **Antihistamines** (reduce/prevent pruritus)
- **Laxatives**