---
tags:
  - MS
title: Syndrome of Inappropriate Antidiuretic Hormone Secretion
aliases:
  - SIADH
description: A syndrome caused by elevated production of antidiuretic hormone (ADH), resulting in fluid retention and an inability to secrete dilute urine.
date: 2024-01-01
---
The **syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone** (SIADH) refers to an excessive production of the **antidiuretic hormone** (ADH) from the [[pituitary gland]] even during periods of subnormal serum osmolality. Clients will be unable to excrete dilute urine, fluid is retained, and hyponatremia occurs secondary to dilution (dilutional hyponatremia).
- Often of **non-endocrinal origins**; may occur in patients with **bronchogenic carcinoma**, where malignant lung cells are able to synthesize and release ADH.
- Other causes include severe [[pneumonia]], [[pneumothorax]], other **disorders of the lungs**, and **malignant tumors** of other organs.
- **Disorders of the** [[central nervous system]] ([[head injury]], brain surgery, tumors, or infection) directly stimulate the pituitary gland, causing SIADH.
- Some **medications** (vincristine, diuretics, phenothiazines, tricyclic antidepressants) and **nicotine** may also be implicated in SIADH.
___
# Medical Management
- Resolution of the **underlying cause** if possible.
- **Restriction of fluids** and **administration of diuretics** for resolution of dilutional hyponatremia.
___
# Nursing Management
- Monitor **fluid intake and output**, **daily weight**, **urine and blood chemistry**, and **neurologic status**.
- **Supportive measures** with client education regarding procedures and treatment.