---
tags:
  - B418
title: Introduction to Critical Care Nursing
---
**Critical Care Nursing** is the delivery of specialized care for the seriously-ill clients from the point of injury or illness until discharge from intensive care. This deals with human responses to life-threatening problems and comprehensive, specialized, and individualized nursing services. It aims for survival and restoring **quality of life**, and helping families of the critically-ill in coping with stress. Critical Nurses take on the roles of **Caregivers**, **Educators** (facilitator of education for patients, family, and staff), **Managers**, **Critical Thinkers**, **Team-Players** (collaborator) and **Advocates** (work on behalf of the patient). They work to:
1. Care for clients who are very ill or at risk for potential life-threatening health problems. These include: **major surgery post-operative clients**, **illness involving the vital organs**, and even **stable clients with signs of impending doom**. They may be classified as the following:
	- **Level 0**: Patients in normal ward care
	- **Level I**: Patients  at risk of deteriorating
	- **Level II**: Patients that require more observation or intervention
	- **Level III**: Patients with multi-system failure
2. Provide one-to-one care
3. Are responsible for making life-and-death decisions
4. Are at risk for injury and illness
5. Utilize **effective communication skills**
## Responsibilities of a Critical Care Nurse
1. **Assessment**: constant assessment of patients for subtle changes and monitoring of equipment.
2. **Planning**: the patient's psychological and physiological needs are considered and realistic (SMART) goals are set.
3. **Implementation**: carrying out specific interventions to address existing and potential patient problems.
4. **Evaluation**: continuing evaluation of response to interventions and revision of the plan care plan to continue working towards goals.
___
# Critical Assessment Process
Critical care requires **Continuous Monitoring and Treatment**, **High Intensity Therapy**, **Export Surveillance and Efficiency**, and **Alertness for Early Manifestations of Progress or Deterioration**. There are four stages in the assessment framework: pre-arrival assessment, admission quick check, comprehensive admission assessment, and on-going assessment.
## Pre-Arrival Assessment
**Pre-Arrival Assessment** begins when the patient is enroute to the ICU, from the ward, operating room, or emergency room. It is an abbreviated report on the patient to determine the possible picture of the client and their needs.
1. **Assess the Patient**: age, gender, chief complaint, diagnosis, pertinent history, physiologic status, invasive devices, equipment, and laboratory tests.
2. **Assess the Environment**: Setup, Functional Equipments, ECG and Electrodes, Sphygmomanometer, Pulse Oximeter, Suction Machine and Catheters, Bag Valve Mask Device, Oxygenation Equipment, IV Poles and Infusion Pumps, Bedside Supply Cart, Admission Kit, and Forms and Care Documentations
	- This may also be subdivided as the mnemonic **FRC**: Fluids, Respiration, and Cardio.
	- **Fluids**: IV pole, IV fluids, infusion pumps, syringe pumps
	- **Respiration**: Suction machine, catheters, bag valve, oxygen, pulse oximeter, ventilator
	- **Cardio**: Electrocardiograph, electrodes, sphygmomanometer, defibrillator, AED
## Admission Quick Check
The initial assessment conducted after the arrival of the patient. It is a quick overview of ventilation (respiratory), circulation (cardiac), and chief complaint (diagnostics) of the patient. Common diagnostic tests include (a) serum  electrolytes, (b) CBG, (c) CBC with platelets, (d) coagulation studies e.g. PTT, PT, (e) ABG, (f) CXR, and (g) ECG.
- **Appearance**
- **Airway**: patency and positioning of artificial airways (if present)
- **Breathing**: quantity and quality of respirations, breath sounds, and presence of spontaneous breathing
- **Circulation**, **Cerebral Perfusion**, and **Chief Complaint**: ECG, blood pressure, peripheral pulses, capillary refill, skin color, skin temperature, skin moisture, presence of bleeding, level of consciousness, and responsiveness.
- **Drugs**: drugs used prior to admission, current medications
- **Diagnostic Tests**: diagnostic test results
- **Equipment**: patency of vascular and drainage systems, equipment functioning, and labeling.
## Comprehensive Admission Assessment
A physiologic and psychosocial assessment as baseline for comparing data for improvement or deterioration.
- **Past Medical History**: medical conditions, laboratory procedures, hospitalisations, medications, allergies, and a review of body systems.
- **Social History**: age, gender, ethnic origin, height, weight, education, occupation, marital status, religion, significant others, history of substance abuse, and history of domestic abuse.
- **Psychological Assessment**: communication, coping styles, anxiety, stress, family needs
- **Spirituality**: faith/preference, spiritual practices
- **Physical Assessment**: nervous system, cardiovascular system, respiratory system, renal system, gastrointestinal system, endocrine system, hematologic system, immune system, and integumentary system:
	- **Nervous System Assessment**: GCS scoring, Pupil Assessment, LOC, Trauma
	- **Cardiovascular System Assessment**: Pulses, Perfusion
	- **Respiratory System Assessment**: Breathing Pattern (rate, rhythm, depth), Breath Sounds, ABG, Secretions
	- **Urinary System Assessment**: urine amount, color, odor, diagnostic tests (UA, BUN, Creatinine)
	- **Gastrointestinal System Assessment**: nutrition, hydration status, contour and symmetry of abdomen.
	- **Integumentary System Assessment**: check overall integrity and presence of ulcers.
## On-going Assessment
The continuing comprehensive assessment done to determine response to therapy, progression of improvement, and outcomes. This is done for as long as the patient remains within the hospital. Frequency of assessment depends on patient stability and risk. Unstable patients are assessed q15min, but stable patients are assessed q2hr or q4hr. **Stability** (ability to maintain equilibrium) may be influenced by:
- **Complexity**: the number of systems implicated in the illness, e.g., a multi-system failure is much more complex than the failure of a single system.
- **Predictability**: expectations of a certain course of events, e.g., increased monitoring for complications after a recent blood transfusion.
- **Vulnerability**: susceptibility to actual or potential stressors.
- **Resiliency**: capacity to return to a restorative level of functioning, e.g., between a 34 year old and an 96 year old patient experiencing the same infectious disease, the old patient may have more frequent assessments.
___
# Multidisciplinary Teams in Critical Care
Nurses work with critically ill patients commonly collaborate with a multidisciplinary team of health care professionals. A team approach allows for a patient's diverse needs, and include: (a) registered nurses, (b) doctors, (c) physician assistants, (d) advanced practice nurses e.g. clinical nurse specialists and nurse practitioners, (e) patient care technicians, (f) respiratory therapists, and others.
- **Rapid Response Teams** (RRTs) was identified as an evidence-based, lifesaving strategy that improves patient outcomes by preventing avoidable patient deaths outside the critical care areas. They mostly consist of a structured group and usually include a **critical care nurse**, a **respiratory therapist**, and possibly a **doctor** who collaborates with the patient's nurse and intervenes appropriately. They may be called upon at 24/7 if concerns about the patient's condition is raised.
___
# Communication in Health Care
Communication failures can result in serious adverse effects. Health care professionals must pay close attention to communicating effectively. A structured communication tool, such as **SBAR**, improves the effectiveness of communications, provides a safer environment for patients, and promotes collegial relationships among health care team members. SBAR provides a clear, concise, and effective way to transmit information.

| SBAR               | Content                                         |
| ------------------ | ----------------------------------------------- |
| **Situation**      | What is going on at the present time?           |
| **Background**     | What relevant events have happened in the past? |
| **Assessment**     | What do you think is happening?                 |
| **Recommendation** | What do you think needs to be done?             |
>[!QUOTE] A Nurse Calls a Physician and uses the SBAR communication tool
>Dr. Garci, this is Nurse Gloria. I am calling from Fatima University Medical Center about your patient Renato. (**S**) Renato is having increasing dyspnea and is complaining of chest pain. (**B**) He had a total knee replacement two days ago. About two hours ago, he began complaining of chest pain. His pulse is 120 and his blood pressure is 128 over 54. He is restless and short of breath. (**A**) He may be having a cardiac event or a pulmonary embolism. (**R**) I recommend that you see him immediately and that we start him on oxygen stat. Do you agree?

**Closed-Loop Communication** is another applied form of communication where **all details are confirmed by both parties** by having the receiver repeat information back to confirm understanding. This type of communication is used in healthcare to avoid errors:
>[!EXAMPLE] Example of Closed-Loop Communication
>**Physician:** “*Could you give methergine, 0.2 mg IM, now, please?*”
>
>**Nurse:** “*I'll get methergine, 0.2 mg IM, to give immediately.*”

___
# American Heart Association Standards
## The Basic Life Support (BLS) Survey
The BLS Survey is a **systematic approach to basic life support** that any trained healthcare provider can perform. This approach stresses **early CPR** and **early defibrillation**. It does not include advanced interventions such as advanced airway techniques or drug administration. It helps achieve goals of supporting or restoring effective oxygenation, ventilation, and circulation until the **Return of Spontaneous Circulation** (ROSC) or initiation of [[ACLS Interventions]].

|            Action             | Method                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| :---------------------------: | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Check for Responsiveness**  | **Verbalization**: tap and shout "*Are you alright?*"<br>Check for absent or abnormal **breathing**, or gasping, by looking or scanning chest movement for 5 to 10 seconds.                                                                                             |
| **Active Emergency Response** | Activate the emergency response system and get an **AED** or send someone to get it.                                                                                                                                                                                    |
|        **Circulation**        | **Check the carotid pulse** for 5 to 10 seconds.<br><ul><li>If absent, <strong>start HQCPR (30:2)</strong> starting with chest compressions.</li><li>If a pulse is present, <strong>start rescue breathing q5s/q6s</strong> (10-12/min) and check pulse q2min</li></ul> |
|      **Defibrillation**       | If pulse is absent, **check for shock-able rhythm** with an AED as soon as it arrives; follow each shock with CPR, bginning with compressions.                                                                                                                          |
## The Acute Cardiac Life Support Survey (Pre-Arrest)
The ACLS survey allows for healthcare providers to **continue to assess and perform appropriate actions** until transfer to the next level of care. Assessment and intervention often becomes simultaneous in ACLS scenarios. An important component of this survey is the **differential diagnosis**, where identification and treatment of underlying causes may be critical to patient outcome.
>[!DANGER] Use the BLS Survey first, then ACLS Survey for unconscious patients. In conscious patients, use the ACLS Survey first.


|           Survey           |      Code      | Action                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
| :------------------------: | :------------: | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
|                            |     **V**      | Visualize and Verbalize<br>**Vital Signs** (HR, BP, RR, O2, Temp.)                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
|  **Airway and Breathing**  |     **O**      | **Oxygen** if SpO2 is <94%.<br><ul><li><strong>Nasal Cannula</strong> allows for 2-4 L/min</li><li><strong>Face Mask</strong> allows for 2-10 L/min</li></ul>                                                                                                                 |
|      **Circulation**       | **M**<br>**I** | **Monitor** via pads on the chest, provide **HRQCPR** as needed, and rhythm intervention.<br>**Establish Input and IV**                                                                                                                                                       |
| **Differential Diagnosis** |     **T**      | **Treat reversible causes** (5 Hs and 5 Ts)<br><ul><li><strong>5 Hs</strong>: Hypovolemia, Hypoxia,  Hydrogen Ion, Hyper/Hypokalemia, Hypothermia</li><li><strong>5 Ts</strong>: Tension Pneumothorax, Tamponade (Cardiac), Toxins, Thrombosis (Pulmonary/Coronary)</li></ul> |
## Return of Spontaneous Circulation (Post-Arrest)
The resumption of **sustained**, **perfusing cardiac activity** associated with **significant respiratory effort** after cardiac arrest. Signs of ROSC include **breathing**, **coughing**, or **movement** and a **palpable pulse or a measurable blood pressure**. Attachments on a patient post-arrest include:
1. **Nasogastric Tube** (NGT)
2. **X-Ray**
3. **Cardiovascular Pressure** (CVP)
4. **12-Lead Electrocardiogram** (ECG)
5. **Foley Catheter**

|              ROSC Assessment              | Interventions                                                                                                                    |
| :---------------------------------------: | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
|          **C**: **Circulation**           | **Fluids** (PNSS/PLRS) 1-2 L<br>Perform **4-point Auscultation**                                                                 |
| **A**: **Airway**<br>**B**: **Breathing** | **Advanced Airway Techniques**<br>Perform **5-point Auscultation**                                                               |
|           **D**: **Disability**           | **Therapeutic Hypothermia**: PNSS/PLRS 30 cc/kg @ 4°C over 12 - 24 hours. Core body temperature should remain from 32°C to 34°C. |
___
# Cardiac Monitoring
**Cardiac Monitoring** provides continuous observation of the patient's heart rate and rhythm and is a routine nursing procedure in critical care patients. It is common in emergency units, post-anesthesia recovery units, and operating rooms. It often involves an **Electrocardiograph** (ECG), a graphic representation and record of the electrical activity of the heart muscles. The record is a waveform across a grid whose X-axis is time, and Y-axis being the voltage recorded.
- The grid consists of large squares equivalent to 200 milliseconds and 0.5 mV, subdivided further into a 5 by 5 grid whose cells are equivalent to 40 milliseconds and 0.1 mV.
## Normal ECG
|  Component   | Description                                                                                           | Types                     |
| :----------: | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------- |
|   **Wave**   | Positive and negative deflections of the wave from the baseline.                                      | P, Q, R, S, T-waves       |
| **Interval** | Durations between two specific ECG events.                                                            | PR, QRS, QT, ST intervals |
| **Segment**  | The length between two specific points on the ECG which are supposed to be at the baseline amplitude. | PR, ST, TP-segment        |
| **Complex**  | The combination of multiple waves group together.                                                     | QRS complex               |
