---
tags:
  - B418
title: Respiratory Assessment, Techniques and Monitoring Systems
---
# Review on the Assessment of Respiratory Function
The lungs, in conjunction with the circulatory system, deliver oxygen to and expel carbon dioxide from the cells of the body. The **upper respiratory system** warms and filters air, while the alveoli, the end-point structure of the lungs, accomplish gas exchange.
1. **Upper respiratory system**: nose, sinuses, and nasal passages; pharynx, tonsils, and adenoids; larynx, epiglottis, glottis, vocal cords, and cartilages.
2. **Lower respiratory system**: lungs, pleura, mediastinum
	- **Lung lobes**: left (upper and lower); right (upper, middle, lower)
	- **Bronchi**, which divide into bronchioles, then into alveoli, where gas exchange occurs.

**Ventilation vs Respiration**: ventilation is the mechanical movement of air in and out of the lungs, whereas respiration is the gas exchange that occurs in the alveoli.
- **Inspiration** is the initial third of ventilation, where the diaphragm and external intercostal muscles (main muscles of respiration) contract to increase the space in the thoracic chamber, producing negative inspiratory pressure (NIP), moving air into the lungs.
- **Expiration** is the latter two-thirds of ventilation, when relaxation occurs and intrathoracic pressure increases, and pushes air out of the lungs.
- **Gas exchange** is the diffusion of oxygen from air into the blood, and diffusion of carbon dioxide from the blood into the air.

## Assessment of Breath Sounds
Normal breath sounds are those heard at different areas of the lungs in normally functioning lungs.
1. **Tracheal Breath Sounds** are heard at the level of the trachea, characterized as harsh, discontinuous sounds.
2. **Bronchial Breath Sounds** are heard at the level of the bronchi, characterized as high-pitched.
3. **Broncho-vesicular Breath Sounds** are heard at the level of the scapula, characterized as medium-pitched.
4. **Vesicular Breath Sounds** are heard at the level of the lower lobes, characterized as low-pitched.

Abnormal (Adventitious) breath sounds are extraneous sounds produced by abnormalities of the lungs and airways.
1. **Rales** indicate elevated moisture in the lungs.
2. **Crackles**, a more severe (coarse) form of rales indicating accumulation of fluids in the lungs. Often observed in pulmonary edema secondary to heart failure and pneumonia.
3. **Rhonchi** are sounds continuously created by secretions in the airway.
4. **Wheezes** are heard when airways become constricted, such as in asthma and bronchospasm.
5. **Friction Rubs** are heard from [[B312/04|pleurisy]] and [[B312/01|pericarditis]], when the pleura rubs against other membranes producing a leather-like scratching.

## Lung Parameters and Capacities
1. **Ventilation Perfusion (V/Q) Ratio**: the degree between air entering the lungs (ventilation) and oxygen that perfuses into the blood (perfusion). This ratio must be even in order for adequate gas exchange. **Shunting** occurs when an imbalance of ventilation and perfusion. This results in hypoxia.
	- A low V/Q ratio can occur in conditions like asthma or COPD, where more ventilation than perfusion occurs. A high V/Q ratio can occur in pulmonary embolism or conditions where blood flow is restricted, leading to more perfusion than ventilation.
2. **Tidal Volume** (V<sub>T</sub> or TV) is the amount of air volume that moves in or out of the lungs with each breath at rest.
	- Reduced tidal volumes is found in restrictive lung diseases or neuromuscular disorders, whereas increased tidal volume might be seen in hyperventilation conditions.
3. **Inspiratory/Expiratory Reserve Volume** (IRV, ERV): the *extra* volume of air that can be inspired or expired with maximal effort after a normal, quiet inspiration or expiration.
	- These may also be reduced in restrictive lung conditions where lung volumes are compromised.
4. **Vital Capacity** (VC): the maximum volume of air exhaled from a maximal inspiration. This is the summation of V<sub>T</sub>, IRV, and ERV.
	- Decreased vital capacity can indicate restrictive lung diseases or weakness of respiratory muscles. It is a key measure in assessing overall function of the lungs and can be used to monitor disease progression or response to treatment.
5. **Forced Vital Capacity** (FVC): the maximum amount of air you can exhale from your lungs after fully inhaling. It is equal to about 80% of total physiologic capacity.
6. **Forced Expiratory Volume** (FEV): the volume exhaled forcefully over time in seconds. Time is indicated as a subscript, and is usually one second (FEV<sub>1</sub>).
	- This is particularly useful in diagnosing and monitoring obstructive lung diseases like asthma and COPD. This is used in conjunction with FVC in calculating the FEV<sub>1</sub>/FVC ratio, which helps in distinguishing between obstructive and restrictive lung conditions.

## Pulmonary Function Tests
1. A **spirometer** measures volumes of air exhaled and is used to assess lung capacities. TV varies from breath to breath, and as such should be measured several times. It determines **peak flow rate**, the maximal expiratory flow, and is frequently done by patients using a home spirometer.
2. A **monometer** measures inspiratory effort and can be attached to a mask or endotracheal tube to occlude the airway and measure pressure.
	- **Normal inspiratory pressure is approximately 100 cm H<sub>2</sub>O**. If this value becomes less than 25 cm H<sub>2</sub>O, the patient will usually require mechanical ventilation.
3. A **pulse oximeter** is a noninvasive method to monitor the oxygen saturation (SpO<sub>2</sub>) normally at ≥95% of the blood. This is supplemental to ABG analysis, and may be unreliable. Also read: [[Airway and Ventilatory Management (Burns)#Pulse Oximetry]]
4. **Arterial blood gas** (ABG) **analysis** is the measurement of arterial oxygenation and carbon dioxide levels, and assesses acid-base balance. It is also used to assess the adequacy of alveolar ventilation and the ability of the lungs to provide oxygen and remove carbon dioxide. Also read: [[Airway and Ventilatory Management (Burns)#Arterial Blood Gas Monitoring]]
5. Other diagnostic tests include:
	- Imaging Studies: **chest x-ray** (CXR), **computed tomography** (CT) **scan**, **magnetic resonance imaging** (MRI), **fluoroscopic studies** and **angiography**, **radioisotope procedures** (lung scans), **bronchoscopy**, and **thoracoscopy**
	- Sputum Tests
	- Thoracentesis
	- Biopsies
___
# Respiratory Conditions
## Upper Airway Obstruction
This may be caused by foreign bodies or materials, enlargement of tissues in the walls of the airway, pressure on the walls of the airway, or altered level of consciousness. Assessment utilizes inspection, palpation, and auscultation.

%% missing content? %%
___
# Airway Management
A more in-depth discussion of this section can be found here: [[Airway and Ventilatory Management (Burns)#Airway Management]]
1. **Oropharyngeal Airway** (OPA): also known as an oral bite block. It is a **temporary** airway used to relieve upper airway obstruction resulting from tongue relaxation, secretions and seizures. This **may trigger the gag reflex and cause vomiting**, and as such is not recommended for alert clients.
	- **Frequently assess the lips and tongue to identify pressure areas**.
	- These are **removed at least every 24 hours** to allow for assessment of pressure areas and to provide oral hygiene.
2. **Nasopharyngeal Airway**: also known as a nasal trumped. It maintains airway patency and is used to facilitate nasotracheal suctioning. Its sizes range from 26 to 35 Fr.
	- **Complications**: bleeding, sinusitis, erosion of the mucous membranes
	- **Frequently assess pressure areas and occlusion due to secretions**.
	- **Rotate the tube from nostril to nostril at least daily**.
3. **Laryngeal Mask Airway**: an endotracheal tube with a small mask on one end that can be passed orally over the larynx. This provides ventilatory assistance and prevents aspiration.
	- The "*Combitube*", an esophageal/tracheal double-lumen airway is used for difficult or emergency intubation, allowing for blind placement.
4. **Endotracheal** (ET) **Tube**: inserted into the trachea through the mouth or the nose. An artificial airway used when a patent airway cannot be maintained and adjunct devices for mechanical ventilation are inadequate.
	- Insertion utilizes a laryngoscope to visualize the upper airway. The tube enters through the vocal cords and into the trachea, to 2 to 4 centimeters above the carina (where the trachea bifurcates). The tube is anchored via cuff (also prevents air leakage and aspiration).
	- Proper placement is confirmed through the presence of equal bilateral breath sounds, excursion during inspiration, and the absence of breath sounds over the stomach. Capnography of the ET tube should return a PETCO<sub>2</sub> of 35 to 40 mm Hg. Absolute confirmation of placement is done with a portable chest x-ray (CXR).
	- Once verified, the tube should be anchored with tape or an ET fixation device. The centimeter marking of the tube at the lip is documented per shift.
	- An **ET tube may only be used for no more than three weeks**, use for more than 10 to 14 days usually indicates the need for a tracheostomy.
___
# Mechanical Ventilation