---
tags:
  - MSRLE
title: Deep Tendon Reflex Assessment
---
1. Identify the patient
2. Explain the procedure
3. **Bicep Reflex**:
	- Flex the patient's arm at the elbow and rest his forearm on his thigh with the palm up.
	- Place the **thumb firmly on the biceps tendon** in the **antecubital fossa**.
	- **Strike the thumb** with the hammer.
	- **The forearm will flex at the elbow, and the biceps muscle should contract**.
4. **Triceps Reflex**:
	- Lift the patient's (relaxed) arm to the side (hold at the elbow), facing downward at (normally) a 90 degree angle.
	- **Strike the olecranon** (where the triceps tendon insertion is located).
	- **Extension of the arm should be noted**.
5. **Brachioradialis Reflex**:
	- Support the arm. Identify the **brachioradialis tendon at the wrist**. It inserts at the base of the **styloid process** of the radius, usually about 1 cm lateral to the radical artery.
	- Place the thumb of the hand on the biceps tendon while tapping the brachioradialis tendon with the other hand.
		- **Brachioradialis reflex**: flexion and supination of the forearm
		- **Biceps reflex**: flexion of the forearm
		- **Finger jerk**: flexion of the fingers.
6. **Patellar Reflex** (Knee Jerk): with the knees hanging, place one hand on the quadriceps to feel contraction.
	- If in bed, slightly flex the knee by placing your forearm under both knees by contraction of the quadriceps with extension of the lower leg.
	- Note for hyperreflexia (INC)
	- Use the **Jendrassik maneuver** if no response is noted.
7. **Achilles Reflex** (Ankle Jerk): have the patient sit, place one hand under the sole and dorsiflex the foot slightly. Tap on the Achilles tendon just above its insertion on the calcaneus.
	- If no response is found, have the client kneel on a chair with the knee facing the back of the chair, with the feet protruding. Tap on the tendon, and note a slight dorsiflexion.
	- Use the **Jendrassik maneuver** if no response is noted.
8. **Documentation**