---
tags:
  - MSRLE
title: Abdominal Assessment Procedure
date: 2024-01-01
---
1. **Prepare equipment**: examining light, tape measure, water-soluble skin-marking pencil, stethoscope
	- Empty bladder
	- Short fingernails
	- Warm and comfortable environment
2. **Hand washing**
3. Greet and identify the client
4. Explain the procedure
5. Provide client privacy
6. Inquire client's history of bowel habits
7. **Position the client**: supine, with arms comfortable at the side, knees slightly flexed (dorsal recumbent)
	- Place **small pillows** beneath the knees and the head to **reduce abdominal tension**. **Only expose the area from the chest line to the pubic area**.
8. Assessment: **Inspection**
	- **Contour, symmetry**. If distention or protrusion (protuberant) is present, measure abdominal girth. Contour may be flat or rounded (normal). Asymmetry is abnormal.
	- **Abdominal movements** (respiration, peristalsis, aortic pulsation): diminished abdominal respirations may be abnormal. Vigorous, exaggerated pulsations are abnormal. Peristaltic waves should not be visible.
	- **Scars, striae, rashes, and lesions**.
	- **Color**: normally **lighter than general skin tone**; abnormal if purple, yellow, pale, red, or bruised.
	- **Vascularity**: scattered fine veins; abnormal if **dilated**.
	- **Striae**: silvery-white/brown; abnormal if **red**.
	- **Cullen's sign** (acute pancreatitis, ruptured ectopic pregnancy), Grey Turner's sign (trauma, acute pancreatitis)
	- **Characteristics**: pale, smooth, minimally raised scars, free of lesions or rashes, flat moles and surgical scars may be present. Record the length in cm and location. Good skin turgor.
	- **Umbilicus color, location, contour**: similar to surrounding skin tones, settled midline, inverted, and round. Abnormal if everted, enlarged, or discolored.
	- **Patient Behavior**: relaxed, quiet, relaxed facial expressions, normal respirations.
9. Assessment: **Auscultation**
	- Should be done before percussing and palpating (these alter bowel sounds). Listen for bowel sounds in all quadrants for at least one minute. One sound should be heard every 5 to 10 seconds.
	- Begin from the RLQ, moving clockwise. Sounds are normally soft, intermittent, and from 5 to 30 sounds per minute.
		- **RLQ**: ileocecal valve bowel sounds are normally present here.
		- **Borborygmus**: stomach growling (prolonged gurgling)
		- **Bruit**: (using the bell) over the abdominal aorta and the renal, iliac, and femoral arteries.
10. Assessment: **Percussion**
	- Note areas of tympany or dullness. Use a systematic pattern (LLQ, LRQ, URQ, and ULQ; counterclockwise). Indirect percussion is used to determine the size and location of abdominal organs, air, fluid, and muscles.
	- **Sounds**: flat (bone, muscle), dull (heart, liver, spleen, fluid, feces), resonance (air-filled), hyperresonance (emphysematous lungs; hyperinflated), tympany (drum-like; gas in stomach or intestine)
	- Percuss **liver size** starting from the **==umbilical level of the left MCL==** moving forward and backward to determine the liver borders.
		- Normal height of the liver: 6 to 12 cm (MCL) and 4 to 8 cm (MSL). Enlargement indicates hepatomegaly.
	- **Spleen**: 7 cm wide near the left 10th rib, slightly posterior to the LMAL.
	- **Kidney**: blunt percussion (direct or indirect) should result in no tenderness. Inflammation and infection may be indicated if pain is produced.
		- Stricken at the costovertebral angles, noting tenderness or pain.
17. Assessment: **Palpation**
	- Light palpation in all quadrants, followed by deep palpation (usually not done by nurses)
	- Assess location and abdominal muscle tone
	- Note for unusual masses, pulsation, tenderness, or pain.
	- **Abdomen**: should be non-tender and soft. Abnormal findings include guarding and rigid.
	- **Masses**: no palpable masses.
	- **Aorta**: Palpate the aorta at or slightly above the umbilicus for contour and pulsations. Normally 2.5 to 3 cm wide with a moderately strong and regular pulse.
	- **Liver**: bimanually palpate; under the patient's right flank (11th to 12th rib) and press upward. Place the right hand at the level of the dullness, and have the patient take a deep breath. Normally not palpable. Mild tenderness is normal.
	- **Spleen**: seldom palpable.
	- **Kidney**: bimanually palpate below the umbilicus. Note the size, shape, and tenderness. Normally not palpable.
	- **Inguinal and Femoral Lymph Nodes** palpated bilaterally. Note for enlargement.
	 - Contraindicated for clients with tumors of the liver and kidney
18. Position the client comfortably, and inform them of findings as necessary.
19. Wash hands and document the procedure.