---
tags:
  - INC
  - MSRLE
title: Abdominal Assessment
---
Inspection, Auscultation, Percussion, and Palpation of the abdomen (in that order) for diagnostic findings and discovering underlying pathology
___
# Assessment
1. **Health History** of abdominal disease, bowel patterns and characteristics (frequency, consistency, color, flatulence, belching), problems with weight loss or gain, food habits (appetite, taste, intolerance, N&V, hematemesis, odynophagia, dysphagia)
	- **Medical History**: surgeries, medications, etc.
	- **Laboratory Results**
	- **Family History** of abdominal disease.
## Subdivisions of the Abdomen
1. Quadrants
	- **RU**: mainly the liver and gallbladder; head of pancreas
	- **LU**: the stomach, spleen, left lobe of liver, and body of pancreas.
	- **RL**: cecum, appendix, ureter, spermatic cord, ovary
	- **LL**: descending colon, sigmoid colon, ureter, spermatic cord, ovary
2. Nine regions

___
# Test for Appendicitis
1. **Blumber's Sign**: a sharp-stabbing pain as pressure is released from the abdomen (rebound tenderness).
2. **Rovsing's Sign**: pain in the LRQ from pressure applied in the LLQ.
3. **Psoas Sign**: pain in the RLQ when raising the right leg from the hip while applying pressure on the lower thigh.
4. **Obturator Sign**: pain in the RLQ when then hip and knee are flexed, and rotated internally.
___
# Murphy's Sign
Used for patients with inflammation of the gallbladder (cholecystitis)
1. Hold the fingers under the liver border, and ask the patient to take a deep breath.
2. If the patient abruptly stops midway and experiences pain, then the sign is positive.