---
tags:
  - MSRLE
title: Orthopedic Nursing
---
# Musculoskeletal System
This system consists of muscles, bones, joints, bursae, tendons, and ligaments. There are three types of muscles:
## Muscular System
1. **Smooth Muscles**: non-striated, involuntary muscle (controlled by the ANS), forming muscle layers in the walls of the digestive tract, bladder, various ducts, arteries and veins, and other internal organs.
2. **Cardiac Muscles**: striated, involuntary muscle (controlled by the ANS), comprising heart tissue.
3. **Skeletal Muscles**: striated, voluntary muscle (controlled by the SNS). This is the most abundant tissue in the human body.
## Skeletal System
Humans are born with ~270 bones that merge down to 206 bones. There are two main parts
1. **Axial Portion** comprising of 80 bones, containing the skull, ribs, sternum, and spine.
2. **Appendicular Portion** comprising of 126 bones, with 64 in the shoulders and upper limbs, and 62 in the pelvis and lower limbs.

Bones can be classified according to:
1. **Shape**:
	- **Long Bones**: rounded ends and often bear weight; these are longer as they are wide e.g. clavicle, humerus, radius, ulna, femur, tibia, fibula.
	- **Short Bones**: small and bear little or no weight. These are the carpals, tarsals, metacarpals, and metatarsals.
	- **Flat bones**: ribs, sternum, and scapula
	- **Irregular Bones**: with unique shape, skull, pelvis, and vertebrae.
	- **Sesamoid Bone**: A short bone embedded within a tendon e.g. the patella (kee cap)
2. **Structure/Composition**:
	- **Periosteum**
	- **Cortex** (Compact Bone: compact suggests a hard part of the bone. This gives strength to the bone.
	- **Medullary Cavity**: the space inside the diaphysis contains the yellow bone marrow
	- **Hyaline Cartilage**: cartilage covers the ends of the bones.
	- **Epiphysis**: extremity of the bones
	- **Cancellous bone**: spongy part of the bone, storing red bone marrow where blood cells are manufactures.
	- **Epiphyseal Seal**

Bones have various functions:
1. Provides a framework for the body and allows the body to be weight-bearing and upright.
2. Supports the surrounding tissues as attachments of muscle, tendons, and ligaments
3. Assists in the movement through muscle attachments and joint formation
4. Protects vital organs, such as the heart and lungs.
5. Manufactures blood cells in red bone marrow (hematopoiesis)
6. Provides a storage for mineral salts (Ca and Phosphorus)
7. Joints provide movement and flexibility in the body.
	- Synarthrodial/Synarthrosis Joints
	- Amphiarthrodial/Amphiarthrosis Joints
	- Diarthrodial/Diarthrosis Joints
8. Tendons (muscle to bone) and ligaments (bone to bone)
9. Cartilage is a type of connective tissue
	- Hyaline cartilage
	- Elastic cartilage
	- Fibrocartilage
10. Bursae are fluid-filled sacs that cushion aras of friction between or within the layers of moving parts e.g. between two muscles, bones, joints, etc.
___
# Traumatic Conditions
1. **Contusions**: "bruise"; a soft tissue injury produced by a blunt force (blow, kick, fall)
	- Pain, swelling, discoloration
	- Resolves in 1 to 2 weeks
	- **Subcutaneous**
	- **Intramuscular**
	- **Periosteal** (bone bruise), the most severe form
2. **Strain**: a "pulled muscle" due to overuse, stretching, or stress of a muscle.
	- Soreness, sudden pain, local tenderness upon muscle use.
3. **Sprain**: a torn ligament due to a twisting motion. Blood vessels rupture and edema occurs.
	- Tender joint, painful movement, pain increases during the first 2 to 3 hours due to swelling and bleeding.
	- X-ray is required to R/O bone injury.
	- Typed between 1, 2, and 3 from slight tears to complete tearing.
	- Management: RICE (rest, ice, compression, and elevation)
		- **Rest**: prevent additional injury, promote healing
		- **Ice**: moist/dry cold applied intermittently for 20 to 30 minutes during the first 24 to 48 hours to relieve bleeding, edema, and discomfort.
		- **Compression**: elastic compression bandage controls bleeding, reduces edema, and provides support for the injured tissues.
		- **Elevation**: controls swelling.
		- After 48 hours, heat may be applied intermittently for 15 to 30 minutes qid to relieve muscle spasm and to promote vasodilation, absorption, and repair.
4. **Dislocation**: a condition in which the articular surfaces of the bones forming the joint are no longer in anatomic contact. These are orthopedic emergencies if caused by trauma.
	- Avascular necrosis and nerve palsy may occur if not immediately treated
	- Pain, change in joint contour, change in extremity length, and loss of normal mobility.
	- X-ray confirms the diagnosis and any associated fractures.
5. **Fracture**: a disruption in the continuity of a bone.
	- **Complete**: complete cross-sectional break across the bone.
	- **Incomplete**: only through a part of the cross-section
	- **Closed/Simple**
	- **Open/Compound**
	- The orientation of the fracture may also classify as normal, transverse, oblique, spiral, compression, etc.
	- Pain (increasing severity until immobilized), loss of function, deformity, shortening, crepitus, swelling, and discoloration
	- **4 Rs of Management**
		- **Recognition**
		- **Reduction**: procedure by which the bone fragments are realigned with their original position, either externally (closed) or through surgery (internal)
		- **Retention**
		- **Rehabilitation**