---
tags:
  - MSRLE
title: Care of Clients with Cast
---
A method of **temporary immobilization** for a variety of musculoskeletal disorders involving bones, tendons, muscles, and other tissues. It is a hard-covering that is used to support fractured arms, legs, or other body parts. Casts are made of two types of materials:
1. **Plaster of Paris**: gypsum (calcium sulfate dihydrate) is the precursor.
	- **White** in color
	- Dries in **1 to 3 days**. When dried, it becomes shiny and white
	- Not water resistant.
2. **Synthetic Fiberglass**: a resin cast; the cast is filled with a polymer fluid which then hardens. It is a type of "moldable plastic" which may come with various colors, patterns, or designs.
	- Dries in 20 to 30 minutes, but may require up to 24 hours to fully harden.
	- Water resistant
	- Lighter, cooler, and waterproof compared to plaster of paris.
# Characteristics of a Good (POP) Casting
- White and Shiny
- Odorless
- Light in weight
- Not too tight nor too loose
- Resonant upon percussion
___
# Purposes of Casting
1. **Correct deformity**
2. **Immobilize a bone during healing**
3. **Immobilize a bone after surgery**
4. **Support, maintain, and realign a bone**
5. Prevent or decrease **muscle contractions**
6. Serve as a **mold of a limb** in making an artificial limb
___
# Types of Casts
1. **Unilateral Hip Spica Cast**
2. **One-and-One-Half Hip Spica Cast** with an abduction bar
3. **Bilateral Long-leg Hip Spica Cast** with an abduction bar
4. **Short-Legged Hip Spica Cast** from the chest to the thigh or knees
5. **Walking Cast**: affectation of tarsals and metatarsals with callus formation
6. **Basket Cast** used for massive bone injury of the patella to facilitate wound dressing.
7. **Patellar Tendon Bearing Cast** affectation of tibia-fibula with callus formation
8. **Quadrilateral**/**Ischial Weight Bearing Cast**: affectation of the shaft of femur with callus formation
9. **Pantalon Cast**: affectation of the pelvis.
10. **Delvit cast**: affectation of the 1/3rd of the tibia-fibula with callus formation.
11. **Cast brace**: fracture of the distal 1/3rd of the femur and proximal 1/3rd of the tibia with callus formation.
12. **Body Cast**: encircles the trunk, stabilizing the spine. Used for affectation of the lower dorsolumbar spine.
13. **Minerva Cast**: applied around the neck and trunk of the body. Used for affectation of the cervical and upper dorsolumbar spine.
14. **Rizzer's Jacket Cast**: used in the affectation of the thoracolumbar spine and scoliosis (esp. S-shaped variations)
15. **Shoulder Spica Cast**: applied around the trunk of the body then the shoulder, arm, and hand. Used for the affectation of the humerus and shoulder joint.
___
# Cast Techniques
1. **Bivalving**: cutting the cast into two halves from the upper to bottom portion to relieve tightness of the casted extremity.
2. **Windowing**: creating a "window" on a cast on the site of a wound or such for the purpose of visualization, care, medication, etc.
3. **Reinforcing**: reapplication of POP to regain strength when instabilities (getting POP wet, cracks, breaks) are found.
4. **Petalling**: pulling the stockinet over the cast, wrapping it around the rough edges of the cast, providing protection for the skin. A 4" piece of tape is wrapped half inside and half outside the cast.
___
# Guidelines of Casting
1. **Required Materials** for **Casting**
	- **Pail of water** (room temp), where POP is submerged
	- **Stockinet**: used to protect the skin
	- **Wadding/Padding Sheet**: used as padding
	- **Bandage Scissors**: used to cut the sheets/stockinet
	- **Trimming Knife**: used to smoothen the edges of the cast
	- **Newspaper**: used to protect the floor or area
	- **Disposable Gloves**
	- **Plaster of Paris or Fiberglass**: casting materials
2. **Required Materials** for **Removal of Casting**:
	- **Stryker Cast Cutter**: used for bivalving, windowing, and removal of cast.
	- **Cast Spreader**: used to spread a bivalved cast.
1. **General Procedure**:
	- **Apply Stockinet** for skin protection
	- **Apply Wadding/Padding Sheet**: gives room for the arm to move very slightly.
	- **Apply the Fiberglass** or the **Plaster Cast**
2. **Principles of Casting**:
	- Apply **stockinet** and padding first before applying a cast
	- Apply **cast** by including the **joint above and the joint below** the affected part
	- Apply cast in **circular motion** and **smoothen with the palm** (not with fingertips to avoid uneven indentation)
	- **Support with the palm** and **not the fingertips**
	- 8" (thigh), 6" (leg), 4" (forearm)
3. **Considerations During Drying**:
	- Keep the cast **uncovered** to dry.
	- Check for **cracks or breaks** in the cast.
	- Keep the cast **always clean**.
	- Turn the patient **every 2 hours** while the cast dries
	- **Prevent any indentation** in the cast due to pressure
	- **Avoid resting the cast on hard surfaces** or sharp edges
	- Do **not** use the abduction bar in lifting or carrying the patient. (Abduction bars are used to hold muscles, tendons, bones in place)
	- Place a **plastic lining at the edge** of the cast if the cast is **near the groin** to avoid soiling and wetting the cast.
___
# Cast Care Instructions and Health Education
- Nursing Interventions:
	- Assess the **alarming signs** and **complications of casting body and extremities**.
	- Assess **neurovascular status hourly** during the first 24 hours.
	- The patient may ambulate with the use of [[MS/RLE/04|assistive devices]].
- Maintain cast **hygiene** and **dryness**. Do not allow patients or nurses to write on casts while in admission.
- Report presence of **cracks or breaks** in the cast
- **Rough edges** should always be **padded** to protect the skin from irritation
	- Padding is added and taped on.
- **Avoid using any objects in scratching the skin** under the cast.
	- A hairdryer set to cool air may relieve itchiness. Do **not** blow hot or warm air into the cast as this may cause **sweating**.
- **Avoid putting powders or lotions** inside the cast.
- **Cover the cast while eating** to avoid any spills or crumbs to enter the cast.
- **Elevate the cast** on a cloth-covered pillow **above the level of the heart** to **decrease swelling**
	- If for legs, 6" to 10" or on a 45 degree elevation.
- Encourage the client to **move digits** to promote circulation.
- Do **not** use the **abduction bar** in turning, lifting, or carrying the patient.
- **Report any alarming signs**:
	- **Fever**: 36.5°C to 37.5°C is normal. Drink fluids, regular IVF, wear light clothing.
	- **Pain**: always the first sign to be assessed during cast care using a pain scale (don't use 1 to 10??)
	- **Swelling**
	- **Drainage**
	- **Discolorations** on the distal limb (cyanotic, pallor)
	- **Numbness or tingling sensation** (paresthesia)
	- **Cold fingers or toes**: skin should be warm to touch.
___
# Complications of Casting
1. **Necrosis**, **Pressure Sores**, and **Nerve Paralysis** as a result of inappropriate pressure of the cast on the neurovascular components and bony prominences.
2. **Compartment Syndrome** is a resultant **vascular insufficiency and nerve and muscle compression** due to **unrelieved swelling** and can cause irreversible damage to the extremity.
	- **Pain**
	- **Puffiness** in the limb or **swelling**
	- **Pallor** (or discoloration)
	- **Pulselessness** or **persisting cold feel**
	- **Paresthesia**
	- **Paralysis** of nerves or absent/diminished sensation
3. **Multisystem Problems** as a result of Immobility:
	- **Digestive**: anorexia, constipation, nausea, vomiting, abdominal distention
	- **Respiratory**: pneumonia, respiratory atelectasis
	- **Urinary**: **UTI**, renal and bladder calculi may also form
	- **Circulatory**: thrombophlebitis and pulmonary embolus
	- **Psychological**: depression, anxiety
4. **Delayed Complications**:
	- **Malunion**, where bone heals in a disfigured manner.
	- **Nonunion**, where bones do not reattach.
	- **Delayed Union**, where bone healing takes longer than normal.
___
# Procedure
1. Identify the patient
2. Explain the procedure
3. Perform hand washing
4. Assess for **Pain**
	- Is there pain? Is it progressive?
	- Is pain present during passive extension?
	- Where is the pain? Describe its character (local, generalized, soreness, stabbing, throbbing) and intensity (mild; 1-3, moderate; 4-7, severe; 8-10).
	- How long has pain been present? When did it start?
	- What causes or exacerbates pain? What relieves pain?
	- **Pain Management**:
		- Elevate the involved part (decrease swelling and promote venous return)
		- Apply cold packs.
		- Administer analgesic agents as prescribed.
5. Assess for **Circulation**
	- **Capillary Refill**: apply pressure on digit nail. Color should return within <2 seconds.
	- **Temperature of the Skin**: should be warm to touch
6. Assess for **Neurovascular Function**
	- **Numbness or Tinging Sensation** (Paresthesia)
	- **Absent or Diminished Sensation**
	- Ask the patient if they are able to **move the digits** of the extremity.
	- Ask the patient for presence of **paresthesia**
	- Ask the patient if they are **able to feel the nurse touching their digits** (with a pen). Inability to do so may indicate nerve paralysis.
7. Assess for **Infection**
	- Check for **swelling** above and below the cast.
	- Check for **presence of a foul odor** in the casted extremity.
	- Check for **drainage** and note for color, amount, and odor. Mark the perimeter of the stains on the cast to gauge any increases in drainage.
	- Fever
8. Provide the client with findings and document the findings.