---
tags:
  - CMPA
date: 2024-05-19
---
# Triage
| ED         | Disaster/Field |                                                                               |
| ---------- | -------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Emergent   | Immediate      | Minutes; Highest priority due to immediately **life-threatening** conditions. |
| Urgent     | Delayed        | 1 hour; Not life threatening                                                  |
| Non-urgent | Minimal        | 24 hours; no developing potential morbidity.                                  |
| ---        | Expectant      | No time constrain                                                             |
| Fast-Track | ---            | First Aid                                                                     |

## Emergent, Immediate (Red)
1. **Sucking Chest Wound**
2. **Airway Obstruction** secondary to mechanical cause
3. **Shock**
4. **Hemo/Tension Pneumothorax**
5. **Asphyxia**
6. **Open fractures of the long bone**: femur fracture may result in fat embolism syndrome.
7. **2nd to 3rd Degree Burns with 15% to 40% TBSA**
## Urgent, Delayed (Yellow)
1. **Fracture requiring open reduction**
2. **Genitourinary (GUT) disruptions**
3. **Eye and CNS Injuries**
4. **Maxillofacial injuries without Airway Compromisation**
## Non-Urgent, Minimal, Minor (Green)
1. **Behavioral Disorders**
2. **Extremity Fractures**
3. **Minor Burns**
4. **Sprains**
## Expectant (Black)
1. **Profound Shock with Multiple Injuries**
2. **Unresponsive Patients with Penetrating Head Wounds**
3. **Seizures/Vomiting within 24 hours after radiation exposure**
4. **High Spinal Cord Injury**: cervical area
5. **Agonal respiration, no blood pressure, no pulse, and fixed pupils**
6. **2nd to 3rd degree burns in excess of 60% TBSA**
## Primary Survey
Conscious, trauma
1. **Airway**
2. **Breathing**
3. **Circulation**
4. **Disability**
___
# Disaster Nursing
A **disaster** is a destructive event that disrupts the normal function of the community. This may both be ecological (nature) or emergent.
- **Natural Disaster**: an ecological disruption or threat.
- **Man-made Disasters**: fire, explosions, armed conflicts, acts of war, transportation accidents, radiologic events, chemical spills
## Phases of Disaster Management Program
1. **Preparedeness**: proactive planning, planning for potential vulnerabilities, and warnings (e.g., a Staging Warning for Typhoon).
2. **Mitigation**: measures to **reduce the harmful effects** of a disaster by attempting to limit its impact.
3. **Response**: the actual implementation of the disaster plan, **reaction** to the disaster process, **relief** provision, and **rescue** responses.
4. **Recovery**: returning to pre-disaster state, rebuilding, repairing, rehabilitation
5. **Evaluation**: evaluate, and plan for the **future**.
___
# Burns
## Electrical Burns
Due to the nature of electrical burns, they are **automatically classified as third-degree burns**. They also have an **entrance and exit** wound from where the electricity enters and exits the body.
## Depth of Burn Injury
1. **1st Degree** (Superficial-Partial Thickness): **burns of the epidermis**, and possibly a portion of the **dermis**
	- Reddened, blanches with pressure
	- ex. Sunburn
	- **Nursing Diagnosis**: **Pain**. Cooling soothes the pain.
2. **2nd Degree** (Deep Partial Thickness): **burns of the epidermis and dermis**.
	- Blistered, weeping surface
	- Recovery takes up to 4 weeks.
	- **Nursing Diagnosis**: **Pain**. 
	- ex. scalding, flash flame
3. **3rd Degree** (Full Thickness): burns reach the **muscle or even bone**. Pain is not felt due to the nerves being damaged.
	- Pale-white and painless burn wound.
	- **Nursing Diagnosis**: **Hypovolemic Shock; Fluid Volume Deficit**. Apply or insert fluids. Plain LR is preferable due to its electrolytes. PNSS can be used if unavailable.
	- ex. electrical burn, chemical burn.
## Extent of Burn Injury
1. **Head**: 9%
2. **Torso**: 36% (Chest and Abdomen are 9% each)
3. **Arms**: 9%
4. **Legs**: 18%
5. **Perineum**: 1%
## Phases of Burn Management
Nursing interventions in trauma patients are Airway, Breathing, Circulation, Disability (ABCD)
1. **Emergent** or **Resuscitative Phase**: from the onset of injury to completion. There is **generalized dehydration** in burns, as the capillaries are damaged and plasma leaks from circulation. Intravascular fluid shifts to interstitial or extracellular spaces. This also results in **hemoconcentration**. **Cell damage** results in **hyperkalemia** and loss of plasma results in **hyponatremia**. Hyperkalemia can result in acute kidney injury, manifesting as **Kussmaul breathing**. **Hyperglycemia** also occurs from stress.
	- **First Aid**
	- **Fluid Resuscitation**: PLR
	- **Ensure Airway Patency** from inhalation of smoke and burning of the airway
2. **Acute** or **Intermediate Phase**:
	- Prevent and treatment of **infection**.
	- **Nutritional support** and **wound closure**.
	- **Hydrotherapy**
3. **Rehabilitation Phase**: 
	- Prevention of scars and contractures.
	- Physical and occupational rehabilitation.
	- **Cosmetic** reconstruction.
	- Psychosocial **counselling**.
## Medical Management
1. **Pain** is managed with opioids (Tramadol, Demerol, Morphine), NSAIDs, and anxiolytics.
2. **Wound Cleaning**
3. **Hydrotherapy**: provides active exercise and cleaning the body.
4. **Antimicrobial Therapy**:
	- Silver sulfadiazine (Silvadene) 1%.
	- Mafenide acetate (Sulfamylon), Acticoat: effective against gram positive and negative bacteria
5. **Fluid Requirement**: $\text{2 to 4 ml/kg/\% TBSA}$ given 50% within the first 8 hours, then 25% within the next two hours.
	- e.g. A burn patient has a 50% TBSA burn. 2 * 50 * 50 = 5000 ml over 24 hours = 2,500 mL in the first 8 hours, 1,250 hours for the two 8-hour periods after.
# Example Questions
1. The term given to category of triage that refers to life threatening requiring immediate treatment
	A.) Non-urgent
	B.) **Emergent**
	C.) Urgent
	D.) Minimal
2. Which of the following will fall under a green tag in triage?
	A.) Has significant injuries, can wait hours
	B.) Injuries that are life threatening but survival is good
	C.) Extensive injuries, change of survival is unlikely
	D.) **Minor injuries, treatment can be delayed from hours to days.**
3. Which is the most important goal of triage?
	A.) Assigning each client to most appropriate treatment area
	B.) **Giving priority of care to the most critically ill**
	C.) Providing thorough assessment
	D.) Obtaining appropriate monitoring
4. A 47 year old male with history of vehicular accident is admitted. The nurse determines that a patient has a patent airway. The next assessment of the nurse would be?
	A.) Check consciousness%%Disability%%
	B.) **Observe breathing effort**%%Breathing%%
	C.) Examine the patient for bleeding%%Circulation%%
	D.) Assess pulses%%Circulation%%
5. The other name for delayed triage category:
	A.) Minor 
	B.) **Non-urgent**
	C.) Minimal
	D.) Urgent
6. Mitigating phase includes measures to reduce harmful effects. The following fall under this type, except:
	A.) Establishing standards
	B.) **Education and training**
	C.) Requirement for building permit
	D.) Fire exit
7. Which phase of disaster management is undertaken to handle a disaster when it strikes?
	A.) **Preparedness**
	B.) Evaluation
	C.) Response
	D.) Mitigation
8. Which phase of disaster management is done during the actual disaster?
	A.) Preparedness
	B.) Evaluation
	C.) **Response**
	D.) Mitigation