---
tags:
  - B317
  - CMPA
  - INC
title: Psychiatric Nursing
draft: true
date: 2024-10-15
---
# Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
An **obsession** is a repetitive, irrational thoughts or acts. These thoughts are ego-dystonic.
- Obsessions often focus on **contamination**, with the resultant compilation being cleaning to work the resultant fear and anxiety.
- OCD is a disorder based on **fear and anxiety**.
>[!TIP] vs. Obsessive Compulsive Personality
>An individual with specific traits, such as being excessively clean, neat, and organized individual. Freud identifies this as an **anal personality**. When this results in dysfunction (workplace, household), only then is it identified as an obsessive compulsive personality disorder (OCPD). Contrastingly, OCD is determined when compulsions persist for **longer than one hour**.

## Psychopathology
1. **Biologic Basis**: genetics, GABA deficiency (blocks inhibitors)
2. **Psychodynamic Basis**: Sigmund Freud's **anal** psychosexual stage involves the anus and urethra as the libidinal areas. Activities such as micturating and defecation are libidinal activities. At this stage, at 1 ½ to 3 years of age, the use of rigid or strict toilet learning standards creates conflicts of "holding it on letting it go". This produces feelings of ambivalence (parental love and hate), which can produce feelings of guilt, which are then repressed. This results in the primary defence mechanism of "**undoing**". This mechanism is a reverse reenactment of a particular act. In reverse reenactment, the superego takes principal control. 
	1. Diagnoses: ineffective coping, anxiety
## Nursing Intervention
1. **Safety**. obsessive compulsive activities may pose risks for the patient. 
2. **Rest, Sleep, and Diet**: maintain the fulfillment of physiologic needs. 
3. **Allow rituals within safe limits**. Even mild disapproval is not communicated. If compulsions are dangerous, attempt to provide**alternatives that can be done with perfection**.
4. **Establish expectations and routines, as well as changes in schedules** to allow the patient to adjust their rituals as necessary.
5. **Empathy**
6. **Provide Creative Outlets**
7. Psychopharmacotherapy
___
# Posttraumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD)
PTSD is a trauma/stressor related disorder, and is classified as a dissociative disorder (previously an anxiety disorder). PTSD results from a severe, traumatizing experience. The most common cause of PTSD is childhood sexual abuse. Individuals experience:
- Prolonged psychological distress
- Anhedonia and dysphoria
- Dissociative symptoms (e.g. flashbacks)
- Anger and aggression, avoidance 
- Inclusive thoughts, nightmares
- Negative alteration in cognition and mood. An example of this is amnesia regarding the traumatic event
- In children, **repetitive play** may manifest after a traumatic experience

>[!INFO] Differentiated from acute stress reaction by duration— PTSD lasts for longer than one month.
## Psychodynamics
1. **Biological Basis**: genetic
2.  **Temperamental**: hysterical, really affected individuals
3. **Defense mechanisms**: dissociation, repression
>[!TIP] Nursing Diagnoses: altered thought processes, ineffective coping

Antidepressants (Prozac) and neuroleptics may be given. 
## Nursing Intervention
1. **Safety**: patients may be suicidal or homicidal. 
2. **Accept Their Knowledge on Injustices and Unfairness**; do not presume understanding of their feelings. With anger, help the patient sublimate. 
>[!info] Anger is better than hostility
3. Educate the patient's family
4. Support the patient
5. Help three patient establish and reestablish relationships

>[!success] Psychologist Intervention: **Covert Rehearsal**

___
# Dissociative Disorder
Alterations in consciousness— a discontinuity of the normal integration of consciousness, mood, behavior, and motor activity. Essentially, in a normal individual, the conscious, preconscious, and unconscious levels of awareness should function as a unitary whole. In dissociation, certain areas of consciousness can be walled off.
>[!error] Dissociative Amnesia
>Forgetting a highly traumatizing event (specific) or generalized amnesia. 

___
# Personality Disorder
Personality disorders are felt ingrained maladaptive behaviors. Alterations in personality traits such as thinking, feeling, and behavior occur, making them inflexible and rigid. This eventually leads to conflicts in the workplace or other social roles. There are the clusters of personality disorders: 
1. Cluster A: Odd, Eccentric Disorders 
	- Paranoid Personality Disorder: unreasonably suspicious and distrustful perceptions of others. 
	- Schizoid Personality Disorder: cold, skid, hermit-like lifestyle.
	- Schizotypal Personality Disorder: odd, magical thinking. These people display supernatural beliefs. They have faulty cognition displaying strong adherence to conspiracy-like beliefs. They may experience hallucinations and delusions in line with their beliefs. 
		- Psychopathology: genetic; dopamine elevation
		- Psychodynamics: the oral phase is undergratified. The oral phase is satisfied by a harmonious mother-child relationship during the first year of life. 
		- Nursing Diagnosis: defensive coping 
	- Nursing Intervention:
		1. Establish trust (honesty, non-intrusive)
		2. One-on-one relationship. This cluster did not operate well with groups. 
2. Cluster B: Erratic, Dramatic Disorders
	- Antisocial Personality Disorder: behavior against societal normals, lack of guilt, lack of empathy, and sexually promiscuous individuals (often men). This is a progression of conduct disorders (disruptive, anti-authoritarian behavior) in children 6 to 18 years. A characteristic manifestation of conduct disorders is animal cruelty, the hallmark of conduct disorders
		- Psychopathology: strong genetic tendency, high norepinephrine, unstable/inconsistent family patterns (authoritarian parents, harsh punishments, broken families)
		- Psychodynamics: the use of denial and projection; poor impulse control (unfulfilled anal phase); low frustration tolerance
		- Nursing Intervention: consistent boundary setting in the staff with objective, non-judgmental parameters. If boundaries are breached, non-acceptable and allowable behaviors are differentiated, and consequences are explained. Gratification is postponed to let the client develop tolerance.
>[!tip] Develop Frustration Tolerance
>Children should experience simple frustrations and postponed gratification. Extraneous needs are not immediately given or rationalized.

-
	- Borderline Personality Disorder: impulsive, unstable behavior with intense relationship with **fear of abandonment**. A common causative factor for this disorder is gross child neglect, such as sexual abuse. In emotional distress, individuals utilize self-mutilation to block emotional pain. Another reason for their self-harm is for reality testing— to create a sense of existence. They may also express anger and a cry for help.
		- Defense Mechanism: **splitting**, the ideation of others as either only entirely good or entirely bad. Because of this, avoid intimate relationships
	- Narcissistic Personality Disorder: grandiose self-importance, a high sense of entitlement. Self-perceptions are normally reality-based, but with embellishments and additional exaggerations to elevate themselves.
	- Histrionic Personality Disorder: overly dramatic, attention-seeking behavior. They have a strong need for admiration and may experience distress when they fail to become the center of attention.
		- This is common in women. This may occur in children who gains excessive attention from their parents. 
		- Use a matter of fact approach
3. Cluster C: Anxious and Fearful Disorders
	- Avoidant Personality Disorder: individuals with avoidant, seclusive behavior. They are very sensitive and withdraw easily. 
	- Dependent Personality Disorder: indecisive and clingy behaviors; over reliance on the comfort provided by having someone else to base decisions off of. 
	- Obsessive-Compulsive Personality Disorder: individuals fond of details and standards. They are excessively clean, and organized, to a dysfunctional degree. 
___
# Substance-Related Disorders
1. Substances Induced Disorders: the cluster of physiological, emotional, and psychological symptoms brought about by ingesting a substance. This may be directly from **intoxication**, or as a reaction to **withdrawal**. The individual is aware of the negative effects of substance use, but continues to indulge.
2. Substance Use Disorders fall into two subcategories: **substance abuse** and **substance dependence**.
	- Substance abuse is the illegal use of medically prescribed substances. This can produce problems in familial, societal, legal, and occupational aspects of their life.
	- Substance dependence is defined by the American Psychiatric Association as a disorder meeting the following criteria: 
		- Impaired control: a **craving**; an intense desire to ingest a substance. 
		- Social impairment
		- Risky use; the loss of self-preserving measures when using the substance
		- Tolerance: the gradual increase in the dose required to achieve the same desired result. As a reference, for alcoholism, in normal individuals, 1 to 2 beers produce 0.05% to 0.10% blood alcohol level, and 3 to 4 beers produce 0.15% to 0.20% blood alcgoholfdß
		- Withdrawal
## Psychopathology
1. **Biological Basis**: **brain disease**; decreased dopamine, but with increased sensitivity, producing ecstatic pleasure. This pleasure can be so great that one may let go of responsibilities to allow for a high. 
2. **Psychodynamic**: The overstimulation of the oral phase. They become orally fixated, and use alcohol as a substitute of breastfeeding.
3. **Nursing Diagnosis**: Family Pattern Disturbances, Ineffective Coping
## Substances
1. **Alcohol** (CNS Depressant): causes depression of the inhibitory center of the brain, resulting in uninhibited behavior and ataraxia (lack of anxiety). Raised spirits produce euphoria, which appears with a finished superego. Eventually, these effects wear off, and Shane may be produced, which can motivate the individual to become intoxicated again.
	- **Hangover**: the cumulative effects of the accumulation of acetaldehyde and hydrochloric acid in the blood. This occurs in 4 to 6 hours after heavy drinking. 
	- **Blackout**: *passing out*; a period of anterograde amnesia after heavy drinking. 
	- **Acute Alcohol Withdrawal**: the signs of hangover with marked tremors that appear one to two days after the cessation of alcohol. Additionally, rhum fits and tactile hallucinations occur. 
	- **Withdrawal Delirium**: previously delirium tremens. This is expected in two to three days after heavy drinking. This is common in individuals who binge drinks for seven days or more, then stops. After cessation, **cerebral edema** occurs. This impairs the vial centers (medulla, hypothalamus, etc.), and is potentially fatal.
		- Nursing Intervention: the acute phase warrants:
			- The insurance of safety
			- The supplementation of thiamine: crucial for glucose transport, deficient in alcoholism— Wernicke's encephalopathy, resulting in death or dementia of the Korsakoff's type
			- Magnesium Sulfate
			- Monitor fever and respirations as manifestations of vital center impairment
			- In following care, all sources of alcohol is removed from the environment (beware of manipulative behaviors) and a matter-of-fact approach is used. 
			- Disulfiram sulfate (**Antabuse**) stabilizes acetaldehyde and hydrochloric acid in the blood, reversing the effects of alcohol intoxication. It is used one to two weeks after cessation of alcohol intake
			- **Resocialization**, particularly with **AA**, a self-help group for recovered alcoholics where their feelings are processed. **Alanon** for the family members of alcoholics, and **Alateen** for the teenager children of alcoholics help correct family processes.
___
# Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder 
Impulsivity and instantly fort more than six months. This may be diagnosed for children up to 12 years of age. A characteristic manifestation of this disorder is found in diminished academic performance.
- Psychopathology: biological basis (genetics), mild dysfunction of the frontal lobe (responsible for motor regulation) e.g. after perinatal insult or exposure to toxic agents.
- Psychodynamics: unstable family pattern (broken family, alcoholic parents, or parents with mental illness), chronic depression
- Nursing Diagnosis: risk for injury, family pattern disturbance
- Nursing Intervention: key point is to **assist the child to stop, look, and listen before acting**.
	- **Social skills training** with role-playing, where the consequences of their actions can be explored. This can help them develop empathy. 
	- **Problem-solving skills training**: provide instructions when the child fails to display appropriate behavior
	- **Parent training** is also done to help parents to cope with their children. Self-awareness is the first step for parents to take care of their children. Help them explore their emotions and method of dealing with them. 
	- **Mild punishment**, rather than corporal punishment, is used. Examples of this includes "face the wall" punishments. Inversely, **rewards** should be given for positive behaviors. 
	- **Methylphenidate** (Ritalin) is a depressant used for ADHD. It corrects the function of the frontal lobe, enhancing focus. It is also useful for chronic depression. Methylphenidate is given immediately before meals, as it inhibits the appetite. It must not be given two hours before retiring, as it also causes insomnia and potential manic states (ensure safety). Weight loss may be experienced, so body weight monitoring is maintained. 
	- **Strattera** (Otomoxacin) is a non-CNS-stimulant given once a day