---
tags:
  - CMPA
  - MS
title: 12-01-2024 MS
description: 
date: 2024-12-01
draft: true
---
**Emergency Nursing** as discussed by **Sir Tom Labonete RN-EMT, LPT, Italian Model, Rockstar** on 12-01-2024
___
# Emergency Principles
1. **Common sense**: a lot of individuals feel pressure and anxiety at the scene. Attempt to maintain the intuition held by an emergency responder. Do not forget the basic principles.
2. **Calmness and Patience**: maintain a calm demeanor. Patients can pick up feelings of anxiety especially if displayed by the emergency responder.
3. **The 90-5-5 Principle**: 90% of the focus of the emergency response is delegated to the **safety of the responder**. 5% is for the patient, and 5% is for the bystanders. There is no point in rescuing a victim if the responder themself is put in danger, and may become a victim as well.
4. **Body Substance Isolation, Handwashing**: always minimize the potential for contamination.
5. **Do not treat at the site**. The site of danger is almost never a safe place to perform treatment at. Attempt to make a distance of 50 meters or 100 paces.
6. **Rescue the patient first**. This is a prerequisite for treatment, as mentioned in the previous principle.
7. **CHANT Method**: when asking for help, include the:
	- (a) **Case**, the accident or disaster being reported with the pertinent details of victim count, etc.
	- (b) **Help**, expected required responses e.g. the need for fire trucks, a bomb squad, multiple ambulances
	- (c) **Address**: the location as specific as possible, or important landmarks.
	- (d) **Name**: name of the caller.
	- (e) **Telephone**: the number of the caller for follow-up calls.
8. **Assess dysfunction related to the injury**: the affected body parts are 
## Star of Life
%% add image of EMT logo %% (\*) %%clockwise from 12%%
1. **Early Detection**: the use of the senses to determine the presence of an emergency or potential hazard.
2. **Early Reporting**: calling for help with the CHANT method
3. **Early Response**: if appropriate, the initiation of response
4. **On-scene Care**
5. **Care in Transit**: the ABCs of life are maintained or established in the ambulance.
6. **Transfer to Definitive Care**

>[!INFO] ABCDE
>ABC is done within a hospital setting. The use of ABCDE is done outside of the hospital. The inclusions include **deformity/disability** and **exposure/environment**

 ___
# Ambulance
The following are must-knows about ambulances and their operation.
1. **Driver**: the driver **must not leave** the ambulance. They must be ready to initiate transport at a moment's notice.
2. **Beacons**: the beacon is a **marker**. These are the lights, sirens, and text of an ambulance that marks the presence and location of an ambulance.
3. **Patient Position**: the patient is placed on a **backboard** and secured with **spider straps**. When applied with a c-lock and (head strap thing), it becomes a **spine board**.
4. **Number of Crew**: the standard team is composed of one driver and two crew members.

Ambulances are categorized between two types:
1. **Type I**: ambulances capable of providing **Basic Life Support** (BLS). This involves CPR, bandaging, wound management, oxygen delivery via cannula.
2. **Type II**: ambulances capable of providing **Advanced Life Support** (ALS). This includes tracheostomies, intubations, and other invasive procedures.
___
# Bone Injuries
These take the form of **dislocations**, the removal of a joint from its anatomical position, and **fractures**, the breakage of the continuity of a bone.

## Nursing Considerations
1. **Immobilize the injury. Do not re-place or stretch the bone**. Treat the fracture the way you found the fracture.
2. **Use an ice pack**: cold therapy reduces swelling by inducing vasoconstriction.
3. **Pulse, motor, and sensory assessment before and after splinting**. The presence of a pulse indicates that vascular damage is not present. Pulse is checked distal to the injury. Motor ability is checked by asking the patient to move the digits distal to the injury, and sensory assessment is done by checking for sensation.
4. **Splinting**: the placement of an immobilizing object; anything hard enough to support an injury.
	- **Joint fracture**: bandage from bone-to-bone proximal and distal to the injury.
	- **Bone fracture**: bandage from joint-to-joint proximal and distal to the injury.
___
# Hypothermia

| Degree   | Manifestations                                                       | Management                                                                                         |
| -------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Mild     | Shivering reflex                                                     | Warm the patient with warm food and fluids.                                                        |
| Moderate | No shivering, the hypothalamus fails to induce the shivering reflex. | Hypothermia blanket, as food may be aspirated.                                                     |
| Severe   | Seizures                                                             | Seizure precautions for safety (side-lying), and hypothermia blanket, food may still be aspirated. |
| Profound | Dead or Dying                                                        | Transport to the nearest hospital.                                                                 |
## Frostbite
**Localized destruction of tissue due to freezing temperatures**. The most common areas to be frostbitten are the ears, nose, lips, fingers, and toes. This results in tissue taking a **waxy appearance** (white/pale yellow) initially before becoming **blackened and necrotic** (dry gangrene) if unmanaged. The nurse's management is to soak the frostbitten tissue in warm water until the tissue appears pink or red.
___
# Fainting
Fainting is caused by a temporary loss of blood in the brain. This may be caused by:
1. **Excitement**: extreme excitement can cause fainting. This involves both positive and negative emotions. 
2. **Lack of rest**
3. **Extremes of temperature**: vasoconstriction and vasodilation will reduce blood flow to the brain.
4. **Lack of sustenance** (eating)

>[!WARNING] Warning Signs of Fainting
The warning signs of fainting includes nausea, dizziness, turning pale, ringing in the ears (tinnitus), blurry vision or tunnel vision, sudden feelings of warm and sweat, and feeling faint or light-headed.

## Management
1. **Alert, Verbal, Pain, and Unresponsive** (AVPU) and **Level of Consciousness** (LOC):
	- Check for **consciousness** (alertness) by asking the patient if they are able to hear the patient.
	- Next, **check response to verbal commands** by asking the patient to squeeze the fingers by asking the patient to do so.
	- Induce **pain** (noxious stimuli) on the breastbone, traps, or (muscle between the thumb and index) to attempt to incite a response.
2. **If the face is red, raise the head** to allow blood to circulate away from the head.
3. **If the face is pale, raise the tail** to allow blood to circulate to the head.
4. **Place the patient on supine if necessary**. This equalizes blood pressure and promotes blood flow to the head.
___
# Bee Stings
**Bees** are normally peaceful insects that can become aggressive upon agitation of the bee hive or queen bee. They sting their pray at the cost of their own life as the stinger, parts of the digestive tract, muscles, and nerves are left behind after they sting their pray. Pain, swelling, allergy, or even anaphylaxis may occur.
## Management
**Initially** after the sting, management is:
1. **Swipe with a card** to safely remove the stinger embedded within the skin. Do not press or pull on the stinger.
2. **Wash the site** to clean the puncture site and reduce risk for infection.
3. **Monitor the airway** in case of an anaphylactic reaction that constricts the airway. The patient experiences heat and rashes due to an allergic reaction.

Within **minutes**,
1. **Obtain curved tweezers** to remove the stinger if the initial removal with a card is not done. The tweezers are curved avoid squeezing the end of the stinger where toxins may reside.
___
# Burns
Fire is dangerous because of its heat and the toxic fumes produced by burning materials. For a fire to form, the fire triad (or tetrahedron) is required:
1. **Heat**: sufficient heat is required for a heat to sustain its chain reaction.
2. **Oxygen**: oxygen is essential for the chemical reaction of a fire. Oxygen is a flammable gas.
3. **Fuel**: fuel is continuously consumed in fire
4. **Chain Reaction**/**Combustion**
## Objectives
1. **RACE**/**ARCE**: RACE is used when patients are inside a burning room, as rescue is more urgent than sounding the alarm. 
	- **Alarm**: (2:14) sound the alarm; fire alarm if present, or call for help if relevant.
	- **Rescue**: rescue any persons or patients in the vicinity.
	- **Contain/Confine**: remove fuel from the room if possible (burnable objects) and close doors to burning rooms, if possible.
	- **Extinguish/Evacuate**: use a fire extinguisher if present and/or evacuate the building.
2. **Airway**: many burn injuries are related to inhalation of toxic gases or burning of the airway, inside or out.
3. **Never Remove Clothes**: burning clothes may adhere to the skin, and its removal may cause the skin to also be removed.
4. **Three Magic Words**: **Stop, Drop, Roll**
5. **Medication via IV**: burns will impair gastrointestinal functioning, making oral medications ineffective.
## Therapeutic Goal
1. **ABCs of Life** (as usual)
2. **LRS via IV**: the infusion of Lactate Ringer's Solution using **Parkland's Formula**.

>[!TIP] Parkland's Formula
>$$\text{LR to Infuse: }4\text{ cc}\times\text{Total Body Surface Area}\times\text{Body Weight}$$
>
>This is given to replace fluid and electrolyte loss from burns from leakage and from direct loss within the first 24 hours. In infusion,
>- The first 50% of fluids to infuse is completed within 8 hours,
>- the following 25% is infused in 8 hours,
>- the final 25% is also infused in 8 hours.

3. **Analgesia**: as pain is difficult
4. **Antibiotics**: due to the risk for infection 
5. **Temperature**: to determine the presence of a fever
6. **Monitor Weight**: to monitor fluid status

>[!INFO] Burn Rhabdomyolosis
>A burn patient will have muscle breakdown. This may be excreted in the urine, giving it a bright red appearance, which is a good outcome. This signifies that the kidney is excreting waste, which includes breakdown products of muscle. In other cases, this may also be another cause of complication in patients, such as in kidney failure.

___
# Poisoning
| Corrosive Poisoning          | Non-corrosive Poisoning      |
| ---------------------------- | ---------------------------- |
| 1. Identify the poison       | 1. Identify the poison       |
| 2. Do NOT induce vomiting    | 2. Induce vomiting           |
| 3. Position on the left side | 3. Position on the left side |
| 4. Transport the patient     | 4. Transport the patient     |
>[!TIP] Management
>A nasogastric tube is used to perform gastric lavage.

___
# Jellyfish Stings
**Jellyfish stings** can cause rapid death in large doses in some species of jellyfish, or only pain. It also varies in the number of stingers that comes in contact with an individual.
## Management
1. **Pour sea water** on the sting rather than freshwater and urine.
2. **Scrape the tentacles using a card** (remember bee stings?)
3. **Vinegar**/**Baking Soda**
4. **Calamine Lotion**: anti-pruritic lotion
5. **Transport the patient**
___
# Snake Bites
The intervention is to, first, **assess the bite mark**. Afterwards, **wash the site** and **keep the patient still** to reduce the spread of venom, if present. **Do NOT use a tourniquet, as this often causes more harm than good**, as the venom forms potential boluses that are released upon the release of the tourniquet.

>[!TIP] Tourniquet
>Tourniquets are only good for two hours. These are used for **amputations and severe bleeding only**.

|               |    Venomous    |  Non-Venomous  |
| ------------- | :------------: | :------------: |
| **Bite Mark** |     Fangs      | Multiple teeth |
| **Eyes**      | Oval/Slit-eyed |     Round      |
| **Head**      |   Triangular   |     Round      |
%% add image %%
## Management
Management is **symptomatic**. Different toxins present different symptoms, causing pain, affecting the heart, clotting the blood, etc. These symptoms are managed as they appear. The only actual treatment for the venom is an **antitoxin** from the specific snake venom.
1. **Chemotoxic**: destruction of tissue
2. **Hemotoxic**: causes coagulopathies
3. **Cardiotoxic**: affects heart functioning
4. **Neurotoxic**: causes extreme pain
___
# Q&A
1. EMT responsibility: find and manage an emergency; recognize and eliminate emergencies, recognize and familiarize emergencies
2. Basic requirement before performing first aid: common sense; medical background, training
3. Ambulance: you can load a dying patient; ...a dead body, ...via GCash
4. The most common type of prehospital injury: bleeding; infection, heart attack, ghosting by a boyfriend
5. In an motor vehicular collision, who is more likely to survive? A driver stuck at the front of the car; ...at the door, hit from above by a boulder
6. Who are seated in the front of the ambulance? 1 driver and 1 patient; d, 2p, d and px, d and witness
7. Who is less likely to survive? Driver hit at the door; driver hit at the front bumper
8. What does the latin term "primos auxilium" stand for? First aid; primary survey
9. In the safety ratio, what does 90% get dedicated to? Rescuer; victim, bystanders
10. In the 2005 AHA update, how are the ABCs of life organized? ABC; CAB, BAC
11. This french term "cravat" is synonymous to: neckerchief; 
12. What is the meaning of "hyphema"? Eyes; ears, nose
13. A vehicle that will extinguish fire and is being operated by fire fighters is called: fire engine; fire hydrant; penetrate; fire truck
14. What does ABCDE stand for? Airway, breathing, circulation, disability, exposure
15. Philippine Red Cross is a: Private organization; government agency
16. The antidote for spinal anesthesia is: epinephrine; morphine, nitroglycerine, caffeine
17. A late symptom of compartment syndrome is: paralysis; pain, paresthesia
18. A patient with hyphema is first assessed for: vision; pain, movement of the eyeball
19. An ambulance going to the impact site utilizes: lights and sirens; lights only, sirens only
20. A patient is loaded into the ambulance: head first; feet first, love first
21. Rescuer attire is colored: orange; blue, green, pink
22. A patient on an ambulance stretcher/gurney going down the stairs is transported: feet first; head part first, stretcher first followed by the patient
23. The RN inserts an IV NSS inside a Type I ambulance. Is this appropriate? No; yes
24. Paralysis in the later stages of compartment syndrome is caused by: lack of blood; inflammation; bone damage
25. What are the two important rescue contents of a fire engine? Axe and ladder; hose and ladder, hose and water
26. If the patient has no heartbeat: perform CPR; perform defibrillation, love the patient
27. In the CHANT mnemonic, what does H stand for? Help; hypothermia; handicap
28. In the 2010 AHA update, how are the ABCs prioritized? CAB; ABC, BAC
29. In mild hypothermia, what is the nurse to give? Hot chocolate; epinephrine, blanket
30. In a sprain, what tissue is damaged? Ligaments; muscle; tendon; promises
31. How does a monophasic defibrillator work? Sends an impulse from the ventricles to the atria; (biphasic)
32. In a hypothermic patient who is not shivering, the nurse gives: warm fluids, blanket
33. In a client with a gunshot wound, what intervention may be expected? Chest tube thoracotomy; tracheostomy, use of a portable x-ray
34. A high-oxygen flames tend to emit what color glow? Blue; red, yellow
35. A patient who has been shot experiences what feeling? Warm sensation; wet sensation, cold feeling
36. In a search and rescue, the rescue team searches for: searching for a living person; searching for a dead person (search and retrieval)
37. In a patient rescued from a frozen lake, all wet, conscious, the first intervention to keep him warm is: undress the patient; provide a blanket; load the patient inside the ambulance and close the windows.
38. A monophasic type defibrillator will deliver how many joules? 360J; 200J, 110V
39. What is more dangerous: dropping a lit match on gasoline; dropping a lit cigarette on gasoline, dropping your major subject in nursing
40. An EMT's most important must-have equipment is: stethoscope; bandage, tourniquet (these equipment may be improvised)
41. Is the hair a conductor of electricity? Yes; no, depends on if the patient has hair
42. An example of a superficial burn is a sunburn. This is also known as a: flash burn; wind burn, micro burn
43. Upon arriving at the ER entrance, the personnel meeting the crew is the: security officer; physician, nurse
44. An injured individual who experiences multiple trauma feels cold before dying because of: weather, loss of blood, bradycardia
45. The PPE that can be used multiple times while attending to one patient is an: eye shield; mask, gloves
46. In the prehospital setting, who is more capable? A certified personnel; a trained personnel
47. The biphasic defibrillator delivers 200 joules in both directions. Its advantage is because of its lower current delivery.
48. While performing CPR, an earthquake occurs. The rescuer: Stops and hides; protects the patient, apologizes and leaves the patient
49. In gymnastics, a performer loses balance. What is the safest action to take? Roll; land on bended knees, sign of the cross
50. A patient enters the ER reporting domestic abuse. The nurse: Reports to the police first; informs the head nurse first
51. A patient is choking. First: encourage coughing; establish rapport, place the patient supine.
52. IV Fluid needed in burn resuscitation: LRS; D5050, NSS, Whole Blood
53. Common Anatomical Obstruction: base of tongue; dentures
54. A client reports to the ER after being stung by a bee. The first nursing action is to: open airway; prepare Epipen; remove rings; count the number of stings
55. A patient is electrocuted after coming into contact to a live wire at a light switch. The priority is the: light switch, patient
56. The patient becomes unconscious during the Heimlich maneuver. The nurse: lies down and performs CPR; lies down and performs ventilations
57. Who is the priority in the following cases? Dehydrated infant; elderly patient with chest pain, vomiting adult, a classmate with no ballpen
58. A harmful substance that can be absorbed, inhaled, and ingested: poison; venom, drugs
59. Calling the authorities immediately if domestic abuse is suspected is done because: the latest physical evidence must be collected; fastest time to arrest the abuser; patient's latest memory of the incident must be documented.
60. A bee sting occurs. The nurse prioritizes the: airway; card
61. A patient with an inhalation injury must use a: non-rebreather mask; nasal cannula
62. What is more dangerous? Projectiles from the force of the explosion; heat from the explosion
63. In ACLS, a patient with bradycardia can be given: Atropine; diltiazem, vicks
64. Which is used in muscle cramps? Warm compress; cold compress
65. When is the usual onset of a thrombotic stroke? during sleep or after sleep; during winter, during exercise
66. What is decontamination? Where patients proceed from dirty to clean; where patients proceed from exposed to unexposed, when patients proceed from susceptible to immune
67. Avoid giving oxygen masks to: patients with claustrophobia; patients with trisomy, pregnant patients
68. If an ambulance is heading towards you: the sirens sound high-pitched; the sirens sound low-pitched
69. A patient with an exposed fracture must be: treated for the bleeding first; treated for the fracture first
70. How many percent of the atmosphere is made up on oxygen? 21%; 78%
71. Common disorders of retired EMTs or rescuers include: PTSD; depression, dementia, schizophrenia
72. In a patient whose fracture has been splinted, no sensation is assessed on the area of injury. The nurse: removes the splint and reapplies; proceeds, as this is normal after splinting
73. A patient is drowning on the beach. Which complication arises? Dehydration; edema
74. What does MCI stand for? Any incident the exceeds the responder's capability to treat and transport; Any event that causes great damage and loss of life
75. In an explosion, what vehicle is placed in front of the rescue convoy? Fire engine first followed by the ambulance; ambulance followed by the fire engine
76. PTSD, previously known as operational exhaustion, happens to prehospital personnel because of: too many injuries seen during responses; too much death observed during CPR, too much time spent on service; too much love will kill you
77. Patient is drowning in a river. The complication expected is: edema; dehydration
78. If every liter of O<sub>2</sub> is equivalent to 4%, the how many percent of oxygen is given if we administer 1 L/min. via cannula to the patient? 25%; 21%, 4%
79. An EMT's most important assessment skill to use is the use of his: eyes; nose, ears, lips
80. In CPR, the rescuer becomes exhausted. The action to do is: stop immediately; finish the five cycles and stop
81. In a rape patient who wishes to take a bath, the nurse: refuses to give her a bath; gives her a bath, accompanies the patient in the bath
82. Verapamil is given to patients with: tachycardia; bradycardia
83. In rescuing a patient who is drowning, the rescuer swims: at the back of the patient; at the front of the patient
84. The patient is receiving 15 L/min of O<sub>2</sub> via a non-rebreather mask. What is the FiO<sub>2</sub> being delivered? 81%; 21%, 91%
85. During CPR, what accessory can hinder the rescuer from performing compressions? Watch; belt, ring
86. In a person drowning in a pool, the priority is: safety, airway
87. A patient who drowned is being managed. Which is appropriate? compression only; compressions and two mouth-to-mouth for five cycles
88. Before the term "ambulance", they were called in war as: field hospitals; mobile sanitariums, moving clinics
89. In an unconscious patient who has been rescued from electrocution, the nurse: performs CPR; avoids touching the patient
90. In a patient with a fractured femur, they are tagged in triage as: red; yellow, black, green
91. A patient is thirsty after electrocution. The nurse: places them on NPO status; allows them to drink water
92. A pulseless patient with minimal wounds after electrocution: ignore the wounds and perform CPR; treat the wounds then perform CPR
93. The Latin term "fercuium" in english refers to: stretcher; carriage, first aid
94. which of the following is more dangerous? oxygen tank and fire; liquefied petroleum gas and fire; gasoline and cigarettes
95. A child has ingested non-corrosive materials. Induce vomiting; do not induce vomiting
96. Which comes first in using a fire extinguisher? Aim; push, swing, squeeze
97. An ambulance transporting a stable patient will have: lights on; sirens on, lights and sirens on