---
title: Assessment The Gastrointestinal System
---
## Also Read
- **ANPH**: [[ANPH/13|The Gastrointestinal Tract]]
	- Functions of the GIT
	- Four Layers of the GIT (Mucosa, Submucosa, Muscularis Externa, Serosa)
	- Blood Supply of the GIT
	- The Oral Cavity
	- The Esophagus (UES, LES)
	- The Stomach (Cardium, Fundus, Body/Corpus, Curvatures, Pylorus)
	- Gastric Secretion (Cephalic, Gastric, Intestinal)
	- The Small Intestine (Duodenum, Jejunum, Ileum)
	- The Large Intestine (Cecum, Ascending, Transverse, Descending, Sigmoid)
	- The Pancreas
	- The Liver
	- The Gallbladder
	- Digestion Processes
- **B314**: [[B314/Aging & The Digestive System|Aging & The Digestive System]]
- **A111**: [[|Assessment of the Abdominal System]] (missing)
# Patient History
- **Demographic Data**: age, gender, culture, occupation
- **Family History** and Genetic Risk
- **Medical History**: Previous GI Disorders, Abdominal Surgeries, and Medications
    - **Aspirin** and **NSAID**s may cause PUD and GI Bleeding.
    - **Laxatives** and **Enemas** may cause dependence, leading to constipation.
- **Travel History**
- **Dietary History**
- **Socioeconomic Status**
- **Current Health Problem**: a common complaint is pain.
- **PQRST Guide Questions**
    - **Preceiptating or Palliative**: what causes or relieves the presenting symptoms?
    - **Quality or Quantity**: How severe are the symptoms? How does it look, feel, or sound?
    - **Region or Radiation**: where is pain found? Does the pain spread or radiate anywhere?
    - **Severity Scale**: how bad is the pain on a scale from 1 to 10?
    - **Timing**: when was the onset, what is the duration, and how often does pain occur?
# Physical Assessment
- **Nutritional Status**
-  **Anthropometric Measurement**: nutritional status, height, weight, BMI
- The mouth, pharynx, abdomen, and extremities.
# Abdominal Assessment
- **Have the client void, lie supine with knees bent, and keep the arms at the side**. This should relax the abdominal muscles.
- **IAPePa** (as opposed to the usual **IPaPeA**): Inspection, Percussion, Palpation, Auscultation
    - Leave the reported areas with pain as the last areas to check, as pain causes involuntary abdominal tension, impeding on the assessment.
    - Observe for signs of pain: grimacing
    - Starting from the RUQ, clockwise around each quadrant
- **Cullen's Sign**: ecchymosis (bruising) around the umbilicus is indicative of intra-abdominal bleeding.
- **Abdominal movements** indicate intestinal obstruction (hyperperistalsis). These are rarely seen upon inspection.
# Auscultation
- **High-pitched Gurgles**: movement of air and fluid; q5-15s; 5-30 sounds/min.
	- **Hyperactive**: 30 sounds in 1 minute.
	- **Hypoactive**: 1-2 sounds in 2 minutes. Diminished or absent gurgling may be observed after abdominal surgery, with peritonitis, or a paralytic ileus.
	- **Absent**: no sounds in 3 to 5 minutes.
- **Borborygmus**: loud gurgling sounds due to **hypermotility** of the bowel e.g. in gastroenteritis, diarrhea, or complete intestinal obstruction.
- **Bruit**: "*swooshing sounds*" that indicate an [[aneurysm]] (AAA), especially if heard over the **abdominal aorta**. ==Avoid percussion or palpation if observed; rupturing the aneurysm is life-threatening==.
# Percussion
This method is used to determine and estimate the size of solid organs such as the liver and the spleen, the presence of masses, of fluids, and of air.
- **Tympanic**: high-pitched, loud musical sound of an air-filled space.
- **Dull**: medium-pitched, softer, thud-like sound over a solid organ.
# Palpation
This method (light and deep) is used to determine the size and location of abdominal organs and assess the presence of masses or tenderness (pain).
- **Blumberg's Sign**: rebound tenderness; pain felt when pressure from fingers pressing perpendicular to the abdomen is removed.
# Diagnostic Assessments
## Blood Tests
- **Complete blood count** (CBC): GI bleeding may result in acute or chronic anemia.
- **Prothrombin Time** (PT): Liver damage will prolong an individual's PT due to its role in the production of coagulation factors.
- **Serum Electrolytes**: GI malabsorption, excessive vomiting, and excessive diarrhea may all result in electrolyte imbalance.
- **Aspartate Aminotransferase** (AST), **Alanine Aminotransferase** (ALT): these are liver function tests. AST and ALT levels are raised in chronic alcoholics and patients with viral hepatitis.%%This is due to the increased rate of removal of these enzymes from the body.%%
- **Serum Amylase & Lipase**: the best indicator of acute pancreatitis if elevated within 1 to 5 days.
- **Bilirubin Levels**: evaluation of liver and biliary tract functioning.
- **Serum Ammonia**: evaluation of hepatic function. Ammonia is used to rebuild amino acids or is converted to urea and excreted.
## Urine Tests
- **Urine Amylase**: increased in acute pancreatitis. This may remain high even after serum levels return to normal.
- **Urobilinogen**: indicative of hepatic and biliary obstruction.
## Stool Tests
- **Fecal Occult Blood Test**: test for GI bleeding.
- **Parasitic Infection**
- **Fecal Fats** (steatorrhea): malabsorption.
## Plain Abdominal X-Ray
- Also referred to as a **KUB** (Kidney, Ureter, Bladder) **X-Ray**; a **Flat Plate of the Abdomen**. Used for detection of **masses**, **tumors**, **structures**, or **obstructions**. There are no special preparations required for this test.
## Upper GI Series and Small Bowel Series
- X-ray of the Upper GI structures from the **oral pharynx to the duodenojejunal junction**. Used for the detection of **esophageal** (with a barium swallow), **gastric**, or **duodenal** disorders and function.
- **Up to the ileocecal junction** with a **small bowel follow-through** (SBFT)
- The barium preparation is traced by **fluoroscopy** through the esophagus and stomach.
### Client Preparation
- **8 hours NPO** before the procedure. Withhold **opioid analgesics** and **anticholinergics 24 hours before** the test, as these decrease motility.
- The client must drink ~16 ounces of **barium preparation**.
### Post-procedure Considerations
- **Plenty of fluids** should be given to **eliminate ingested barium**.
- **Mild laxatives or stool softeners can be given**.
- Advise clients that **stool may be chalky white** for 1 to 2 days as barium is excreted.
## Lower GI Series (Barium Enema)
- Radiographic visualization of the large intestine. This detects bowel obstructions due to the twisting of the colon upon itself (**volvulus**)