---
title: Peptic Ulcer Disease
tags:
  - B316
aliases:
  - PUD
description: Peptic Ulcer Disease (PUD) is an open sore on the protective lining of the stomach (gastric ulcer), esophagus (esophageal ulcer), or duodenum (duodenal ulcer).
---
A **gastric**, **esophageal**, or **duodenal ulcer**; an open sore on the stomach's lining. This break may be caused by:
- **Mucus and bicarbonate secretion** as a part of pH maintenance
- **Gastric mucosal prostaglandin** increases resistance to ulceration. Inadequate production results in 
- Inadequate blood supply
- **Pyloric Sphincter Dysfunction**: bile and bile salts may enter the stomach and emulsify the lipid plasma membrane of the gastric mucosa.
- **Delayed Gastric Emptying**
- [[MICP/Helicobacter pylori|H. pylori]] **infection**
- **Duodenal Ulcer**:
	- **Rapid gastric emptying**
	- **Acid bolus delivery**; reduced pH balancing ability of the duodenum.
	- **Increased acid secretion** from CHON rich food, calcium, and vagal excitation.
	- [[MICP/Helicobacter pylori|H. pylori]] produces **urease**, which **hydrolyzes urea into ammonia**. Ammonia stimulates the release of H<sup>+</sup> ions, which causes damage.
- **Other factors**: drugs, cigarette smoking, chronic anxiety, a [[Type A and Type B Personality Theory|Type A Personality]] 
# Assessment Findings
## Duodenal Ulcer
- **Pain 90 to 180 minutes after meals**; may wake the patient up during sleep at midnight to 3 AM in the morning.
- **Pain is relieved by food, antacids, and** <strong>H<sub>2</sub> blockers</strong>; not associated with vomiting (but complications may lead to vomiting).
- **High gastric acid levels**
- Positive test for [[MICP/Helicobacter pylori|H. pylori]]
- Does not represent a malignancy.
- Complications rarely occur; if they do, it is often [[pyloric stenosis]] or **posterior penetrating duodenal ulcer**.
## Gastric Ulcer
- **Pain within a short time after meals**.
- **Accompanied by nausea and vomiting** after eating, and variable response to medications.
- **Low gastric acid levels**
- Positive test for [[MICP/Helicobacter pylori|H. pylori]]
- **25% of GUs are accompanied by significant bleeding**. Higher mortality and morbidity than DUs.
# Complications
- **Hemorrhage**: the most serious complication. This may manifest as hematemesis indicating upper GI bleeding.
- **Perforation**: a surgical emergency; gastroduodenal contents leaks into the surrounding abdomen. **Sharp pain**, **apprehension**, **assumption of knee-chest position**, chemical **peritonitis**, bacterial **septicemia**, followed by **hypovolemic shock**. This results in diminished peristalsis and paralytic ileus.
# Diagnostic Examination
- **Hemoglobin**, **Hematocrit** decreases because of bleeding
- **Positive Fecal Occult Blood Test**
- [[B316/01#Endoscopy#Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD)|EGD]] visualization of ulceration
- Biopsy for H. pylori and malignancy testing
- [[B316/01#Gastric Analysis|Gastric Analysis]] for gastric acidity: normal in gastric ulcer, higher in duodenal ulcer.
# Nursing Interventions
- Supportive care: rest, [[A215/Bland Diet|bland diet]], stress management
## Postoperative Considerations
- Provide **routine post-op care**
- Ensure **adequate function of the NGT**
- Measure drainage accurately to determine necessity for fluid and electrolyte replacement. **Notify the physician if no drainage occurs**.
- Anticipate **frank** (bright), **red bleeding** for 12 to 24 hours.
- Promote **adequate pulmonary ventilation**.
- Promote **adequate nutrition**: removal of NGT is followed by **clear liquids**, and **small frequent bland feedings** as tolerated. Monitor weight daily.
	- If **regurgitation** occurs, instruct the patient to eat at a **slower pace**.
- Place the client in a **mid- or high-fowler's position** to promote chest expansion; teach the client to **splint high upper abdominal incisions** before turning, coughing, and deep breathing.
## Client Teaching and Discharge Planning
- **Wean food intake** until 3 meals a day is tolerated.
- **Monitor weight daily**.
- Provide **stress-reduction measures**.
- Report complications to the physician immediately: **hematemesis**, **emesis**, **diarrhea**, **pain**, **melena**, **weakness**, **feeling of abdominal fullness**/**distension**
- Provide methods against [[B316/02-4|dumping syndrome]].
# Medical Management
## Drug Therapy
- **Antacids**
- **Histamine Receptor Antagonists**
- **Proton Pump Inhibitors**
- **Anticholinergics**: to reduce gastric juice secretion
	- Probanthine, Pirenzepine
- **Antibiotic** for H. pylori infection
	- Metronidazole (Flagyl), Tetracycline, Pepto-bismol
# Surgical Management
Various combinations of gastric resections and anastomoses. These are used if the ulcer does not respond to medical management.
## Gastroduodenostomy (Billroth I)
The **distal end of the stomach** is removed, and the remaining **stomach is anastomosed to the duodenum**.
## Gastrojejunostomy (Billroth II)
The **antrum** and **distal end of the stomach** is removed, and the remaining **stomach is anastomosed to the jejunum**.
## Vagotomy
To decrease stimulation of [[ANPH/13#Gastric Secretion|gastric secretion]], **vagus nerves are transected**.
## Pyloroplasty
In conjunction with a vagotomy to **widen the exit of the pylorus** to facilitate emptying of stomach contents.
## Subtotal Gastrectomy
**Removal of 75% to 85% of the stomach**.
## Antrectomy
Removal of the **antrum** of the stomach to eliminate the [[ANPH/13#Gastric Secretion|gastric phase]] of digestion.
## Gastroenterostomy
**A connection between the jejunum and the stomach** is created, allowing the **alkaline contents of the jejunum to regurgitate into the stomach**, neutralizing its acidity.
## Esophagojejunostomy (Total Gastrectomy)
- **Removal of the stomach**, with a loop of **the jejunum anastomosed to the esophagus**.