---
title: Endocrine and Pituitary Disorders
tags:
  - "#B316"
description: A complex network of glands and organs in the body that controls the release of hormones for metabolism, energy, reproduction, growth, development, responses to injury, stress, and mood.
---
The endocrine system is composed of ductless glands that releases hormones directly into the bloodstream. The major organ of this system is the **hypothalamus**, which controls most of the endocrinal activity of the pituitary gland. It secretes "**releasing hormones**" i.e. **growth hormone-releasing hormone** (GRHR), **corticotropin-releasing hormone** (CRH), **thyrotropin-releasing hormone** (TRH), **gonadotropin-releasing hormone** (GnRH), **prolactin-inhibiting factor** (PIF) and **prolactin-releasing hormone** (PRH).
# Pituitary Gland (Hypophysis)
The pituitary gland is responsible for the production of various hormones, which it then releases based on signals from the hypothalamus. It is subdivided into two lobes:
## Anterior Pituitary Gland (Adenohypophysis; Pars Anterior)
The anterior lobe constitutes 70% of the gland and is found in the **sella turcica**, a depression in the sphenoid bone at the base of the brain. Its secretions include: **growth hormone** (GH), **prolactin** (PRL), **adrenocorticotrophic hormone** (ACTH), **thyroid-stimulating hormone** (TSH), **luteinizing hormone** (LH), **follicle-stimulating hormone** (FSH), **melanocyte-stimulating hormone** (MSH)
## Posterior Pituitary Gland (Neurohypophysis; Pars Posterior)
The posterior lobe constitutes the remaining 30% of the gland. It is responsible for the secretion of **oxytocin** and the **antidiuretic hormone** (ADH; *vasopressin*). However, it does not produce the hormones. It simply stores these hormones which are produced by the **hypothalamus**.
___
# Growth Hormone (Somatotropin)
The growth hormone (GH; pars anterior) manages the growth of body tissues and bone.
## Hypersecretion: GH
- Results in **gigantism** (disorder appears before fusion of long bone epiphyses, leading to **excessive vertical growth**) in children
- Results in **acromegaly** (disorder appears after fusion of long bone epiphyses, leading to **large extremities and characteristic facies**) in adults
## Hyposecretion: GH
- Results in **dwarfism**, a lack of physical development, resulting in short stature.
___
# Prolactin (Mammotropic/Lactotropic Hormone)
The prolactin hormone (PLT) manages mammary tissue growth and milk production.
## Hypersecretion: PRL
- **Galactorrhea**: abnormal production and discharge of breast milk
## Hyposecretion: PRL
- **Agalactorrhea**: lactation insufficiency; decreased or absent milk production during lactational periods.
___
## Adrenocorticotrophic Hormone (ACTH)
