---
tags:
  - B316
title: Cushing's Syndrome
description: Excessive adrenocortical activity, often by the use of coritocosteroid medication, or less often through hyperplasia or other mechanisms.
---
**Cushing's Syndrome** results from **excessive adrenocortical activity**, resulting from:
- Often **the use of corticosteroid medications**
- Infrequently secondary to **adrenocorticotropic hyperplasia**, tumor of the pituitary gland that produces **adrenocorticotropic hormone** (ACTH).
- Regardless of the cause, the **feedback mechanisms for the adrenal cortex become ineffective**, resulting in oversecretion of [[09-1#|glucocorticoids, androgens, and possibly mineralocorticoids]].
- Found five times more often in women aged 20 to 40 years old than men.
___
# Assessment Findings
- **Arrested growth**, **weight gain/obesity**, **musculoskeletal changes**, and **glucose intolerance**.
- **==Classic features==**: **central obesity**, buffalo hump (fatty deposit in the neck and supraclavicular areas), a heavy trunk, relatively thin extremities. **Thin and fragile skin with ecchymoses and striae**.
- Weakness and lassitude due to affected **diurnal cortisone production**.
- **Excessive protein catabolism** (muscle wasting, **osteoporosis**, kyphosis, backaches, compression fractures of the vertebrae)
- Retention of **sodium and water**, resulting in **hypertension and heart failure**.
- **Moon-face**, oiliness of the skin, and acne formation.
- Increased susceptibility to infection; slow healing of minor cuts and bruises.
- [[B316/07-3|Hyperglycemia]] or **overt** [[B316/07-1|diabetes]].
- **Female Virilization**; **recession of feminine traits** (hirsutism, breast atrophy, amenorrhea, clitoral enlargement, deepened voice) due to excess androgen secretion.
- **Mood and mental changes**. **Psychosis may develop**, distress, and depression are common.
- If caused by a pituitary tumor, visual disturbances may occur secondary to pressure on the [[ANPH/15-1#Visual Pathway|optic chiasm]].
___
# Diagnostic Examination
- **Overnight dexamethasone suppression test** to measure **plasma cortisol levels** (stress, obesity, depression, and medications may affect results).
- **Serum Sodium and Potassium**, **Blood Glucose**, **24-hour urinary free cortisol level**
- **Imaging Studies** (CT, UTZ, MRI) may **localize adrenal tissue** and **detect adrenal tumors**.
___
# Medical Management
In many cases, the pituitary gland is the affected site, and not the adrenal cortex.
- If **exogenous corticosteroids** are the cause, **taper the drug to minimal levels** or use **alternate-day therapy**.
- **Surgical removal of the tumor** by **transsphenoidal hypophysectomy**, which is successful 80% of the time.
- **Radiation** may also be used, but takes several months to achieve symptomatic control.
- If **primary adrenal hypertrophy** is the cause, then an **adrenalectomy** may be performed.
- After surgery, **temporary hydrocortisone replacement** may be necessary until the adrenal glands respond normally. This may last for several months.
- If **bilateral adrenalectomy is done**, **lifetime adrenal hormone replacement therapy** is required.
- If **ACTH-secreting tumors** are the cause, and **they cannot be removed**, then **adrenal enzyme inhibitors** may be used. However, the patient should be **monitored closely for inadequate adrenal function** and other side effects.
	- Metyrapone, Aminoglutethimide, Mitotane, Ketoconazole
___
# Nursing Management
## Assessment
- Focus on the effects of the adrenal cortex hormones on the body
	- **Level of activity, ability to perform routine and self-care activity**
	- **Skin trauma, infection, breakdown, bruising, and edema**
	- **Changes in appearance, and the patient's response to it**
	- **Mental function, mood changes, depression, environmental awareness**
## Diagnosis and Intervention
1. **Risk for injury r/t weakness**
	- **Decrease risk of injury**: provide a protective environment, assist the patient in ambulating, recommend foods high in protein, calcium, and vitamin D (refer to dietitian)
2. **Risk for infection r/t altered protein metabolism and inflammatory response**
	- **Decrease risk of infection**: avoid exposure to individuals with infections. Assess frequently for subtle signs of infections (corticosteroids may mask the signs of inflammation and infections)
3. **Self-care deficits r/t weakness, fatigue, muscle wasting, and altered sleep patterns**
	- **Encouraging rest and activity**: encourage moderate activity to prevent complications of immobility and promote self esteem. Plan periods of rest throughout the day and provide a relaxing, quiet environment.
4. **Impaired skin integrity r/t edema, impaired healing, and thin fragile skin**
	- **Promoting skin integrity**: meticulous skin care, avoidance of adhesive tape on skin, frequent assessment of skin and bony prominences, and frequent position changes minimize trauma to the skin.
5. **Disturbed body image r/t altered appearance, sexual functioning, and decreased activity level**
	- **Improving body image**: discuss the impact of the disease on the client's self-concept. Acknowledge that major physical changes can be reversed if the cause of the syndrome is treatable. **Diet** (low-carbohydrate, low-sodium diet with a high-protein intake) can also reduce some bothersome symptoms.
6. **Disturbed thought processes r/t mood swings, irritability, and depression**
	- **Improving thought process**: explain to the patient and family the causes of emotional instability, and help them cope. Encourage them to verbalize their feelings and concerns. Ask them to **report any psychotic** (hallucination, delusion, and illusion) **behavior**.
7. (Collaborative) **Addisonian Crisis**: 
8. (Collaborative) **Adverse Effects of Adrenocortical Activity**
9. **Preparing the patient for surgery**: monitor blood glucose levels, and assess stools for blood because [[B316/07-1|diabetes mellitus]] and [[B316/02-3|peptic ulcers]] are common problems.
10. **Teaching the patient self-care**: present information about the disease (verbal and written).
	- Emphasize the importance of **weaning** corticosteroid medication instead of abruptly stopping.
	- Emphasize the importance of an **adequate supply**.
	- Stress **dietary modifications** (increased calcium, protein) are required in order to counteract effects of the disease e.g. osteoporosis and muscle wasting.
	- Emphasize important of regular medical follow-ups.