---
title: "Chapter 3: The Menstrual Cycle"
---
>[!CITE] Reference
>Salustiano, R. (2024). The Menstrual Cycle. In *Dr. RPS Maternal & Newborn Care: A Comprehensive Review Guide and Source Book for Teaching and Learning* (2nd ed., pp. 50-63). C&E Publishing, Inc.

The **menstruation** is a series of rhythmic reproductive cycle that begins **from the onset of menstrual bleeding to the day before the next bleeding day**. It is characterized by changes in the ovaries and the uterus, influenced by normal hormonal variation mediated by the **hypothalamus** and **anterior pituitary gland** (APG) via a negative feedback mechanism. This cycle functions to **prepare for the release of egg, fertilization, and implantation**.
- Begins recurring cyclically at puberty with the first menstruation called **menarche** and ceasing at **menopause**.
- The duration of the cycle is highly individualized, but the average/mean cycle length is 28 days; as short as 21 days or as long as 40 days.
- The only fairly constant interval is the time from **ovulation to the beginning of menses**, which is almost always **14 to 15 days**.
# Hormonal Control of the Menstrual Cycle
1. **Hypothalamic Hormones**: the hypothalamus secretes gonadotrophin-releasing (GnRF) or inhibiting factors (GnIF) that stimulate the pituitary gland to secrete or inhibit the secretion of corresponding gonadotrophins (Gn).
2. **Anterior Pituitary Hormones**: the producer of gonadotrophins (Gn), follicle-stimulating hormones (FSH), and luteinizing hormone (LH).
	- **FSH** is secreted in response to the hypothalamic follicle-stimulating hormone releasing factor (FSHRF) triggered by **low blood levels of estrogen during the first half of the menstrual cycle**. Estrogen, by the **fourth to fifth day**, is at its lowest in a regular 28-day cycle.
	- **LH**, also called interstitial-cell stimulating hormone, is secreted in response to the hypothalamic luteinizing hormone releasing factor (LHRF) triggered by **low blood levels of progesterone**. Progesterone, by the **thirteenth day**, is at its lowest. **Progesterone is responsible for the rise in basal body temperature** found on the **fourteenth day**, and the **drop on the thirteenth day** in a regular 28-day cycle.
3. **Ovarian Hormones**: **Estrogen** and **Progesterone**
	- **Estrogen** is secreted by the **ovaries**, adrenal cortex, and placenta (during pregnancy).
		- It is **responsible for the development of secondary sexual characteristics**
		- Assists in the **maturation of ovarian follicles**
		- **Inhibits** secretion of **FSH** (negative feedback)
		- **Stimulates** secretion of **LH** (positive feedback)
		- It is **responsible for the proliferative phase of the menstrual cycle**.
		- It is **responsible for the fertile cervical mucus** that is conducive to fertilization; the change of cervical mucus to thin, clear, colorless, stringy, stretchable, slippery, and lubricative, returning a positive ferning test.
		- In pregnancy, it **increases vascularization**, maintains the **highly-specialized endometrium (decidua)**, stimulates **uterine muscle contraction**, causes **fatigue**, and **antagonizes insulin**.
	- **Progesterone** is secreted by the **corpus luteum** (non-pregnant/early pregnancy) and **placenta** (as early as the sixth week of pregnancy until parturition)
		- **Inhibits** secretion of **LH** (negative feedback)
		- Helps **maintain the endometrium by facilitating the secretory phase of the menstrual cycle** in preparation for **nidation** (implantation)
		- **Relaxes smooth muscles, including the myometrial muscle of the uterus**:
			- Maintains pregnancy by **maintaining decidua**. If progesterone levels drops in pregnancy, abortion (early pregnancy) or premature labor (late pregnancy) may occur.
			- One of the main *theories of labor onset* is when progesterone levels drop at term, giving way for the myometrium to contract easily from stimulation by rising stimulants such as oxytocin and prostaglandin.
		- **Increases body temperature** (Thermogenic)
		- **Water-retaining, anti-diuretic action**; **decreases hemoglobin and hematocrit levels**
		- **Increases fibrinogen level, increasing coagulability**
		- **Responsible for infertile cervical mucus**: thick, opaque, sticky, non-stretchable
		- **Antagonizes insulin** along with estrogen, human placental lactogen (HPL), and cortisol.
4. **Prostaglandin**: fatty acids recognized as a hormone secreted by a lot of body organs, including the endometrium of the uterus. This affects the menstrual cycle and contributes to stimulating uterine muscles for contraction
# Stages/Phases of the Menstrual Cycle
1. **Menstrual Phase** or the **Bleeding Phase**, also known as menstruation. Day 1 to 4, lasting for 3 to 5 or 4 to 6 days. It is the **terminal phase** of the cycle.
	- Characterized by **vaginal bleeding** as the uterine endometrium is shed down to the basal layer along with blood from the capillaries and with the unfertilized ovum.
	- **Periodic discharge of blood, mucus, and cellular debris** from the uterine mucosa and occurs at regular, cyclic, and predictable intervals from menarche to menopause.
	- **The period of absolute infertility**
	- **Menarche** is the first onset of menstruation, occurring between 12 to 13 years of age; usually anovulatory, infertile, and irregular.
	- **25 to 60 mL of blood, with about 0.4 to 1.0 mg of iron** is lost every day.
	- Menstrual blood is incoagulable due to fibrinolytic activity.
2. **Follicular/Proliferative Phase**: Day 5 to 14, ending in ovulation; lasts about 9 days.
	- This phase is **controlled by estrogen**, where **the endometrium thickens by 8 to 10 times** during the first few days, known as the **regenerative phase**.
	- After changes level off at ovulation, the endometrium consists of three layers:
		- **Basal Layer**: 1 mm, thick, never alters
		- **Functional Layer**: 2.5 mm, contains tubular glands, consistently changes according to hormonal influences of the ovary
		- **Cuboidal Ciliated Epithelium Layer**: uppermost layer, covers the functional layer, and dips down to line the tubular glands
	- **Ovulation** is present in the middle of the cycle; monthly growth and release of a mature, non-fertilized ovum from the ovary. It is the **period of absolute fertility**. This usually occurs 13 to 15 (average of 14) days prior to the next cycle. At this point, estrogen is high while progesterone is low.
		- **Signs of ovulation** include breast tenderness, slight rise in BBT (0.3°C to 0.5°C; 0.4°F to 0.8°F) preceded by a slight drop (0.2°F) 24 to 36 hours before, related to changes in progesterone levels.
		- **The most fertile time** is 3 to 4 days before and 1 to 2 days after ovulation.
		- **Positive Spinnbarkeit/Creighton/Billings/Cervical Mucus Test**
		- **Mittelschmerz**, left or right lower quadrant pain corresponding to the rupturing of the Graafian follicle.
		- **Positive Ferning Test**
	- **Estimating ovulation time**: subtract 14 days from the menstrual cycle length e.g. it occurs on the 14th day in a 28-day cycle, and on the 16th day in a 30-day cycle.
		- **The period of fertility is calculated as five days before and two days after the day of ovulation**. In a 28-day cycle, the period of fertility is from 9 to 17th day counting from the first day of bleeding.
3. **Luteal/Secretory Phase**: Day 15 to 28; lasts about 12 days.
	- This phase is initiated by ovulation in response to a surge in LH that promotes the development of **corpus luteum** from the ruptured follicle, the *yellow* body that **secretes high levels of progesterone and estrogen**.
	- **Progesterone stimulates the already-proliferated endometrium**, causing the **functional layer** to become thicker (2.5 mm -> 3.5 mm), more spongy, and softer with glands becoming more tortuous as the endometrial capillaries get distended with blood in preparation for **reception/implantation and nourishment** of the fertilized ovum.
		- **If fertilization occurs**, implantation follows 6 to 9 or 7 to 10 days (average 7 days) after. The corpus luteum **lives longer and secretes progesterone and estrogen in early pregnancy**, which is **later replaced by the placenta**. The normal lifespan for the corpus luteum is 10 to 14 days.
		- **If fertilization does not occur**, the corpus luteum *involutes* after 7 to 8 days after ovulation, becoming white (*corpus albicans*) which persists up to 10 to 12 days after ovulation. This causes a **drop in estrogen and progesterone, leading to the endometrial ischemic/premenstrual phase**.
# Menstrual Problems and Disorders
1. **Premenstrual Syndrome**
2. **Amenorrhea**
3. **Dysmenorrhea**
4. **Metrorrhagia**
5. **Menorrhagia**
6. **Oligomenorrhea**
7. **Polymenorrhea**
8. **Hypomenorrhea**
9. **Hypermenorrhea**
## Nursing Implementation
# Menopause