---
tags:
  - CMPA
title: "Chapter 09: Complications of Labor"
date: 2024-11-11
description: Difficulties in labor that may occur in parturients including preterm labor, precipitate labor, prolonged labor (dystocia), premature rupture of membranes, uterine rupture, fetal distress, fetal death, vena caval syndrome, and amniotic fluid embolism.
draft: true
---
>[!CITE] Reference
>Salustiano, R. (2024). The Fetus During Labor. In *Dr. RPS Maternal & Newborn Care: A Comprehensive Review Guide and Source Book for Teaching and Learning* (2nd ed., pp. 271–304). C&E Publishing, Inc.

___
# Premature Labor
Labor that occurs after the 20th week and before the 37th week of gestation. In premature labor, **prematurity**, the leading cause of neonatal death, may occur. Fetal death, small-for-gestational age, intrauterine growth restriction, and/or increased perinatal morbidity and mortality can occur as complications.

>[!WARNING] Risk Factors
>The risk factors of premature labor may be divided across the component of labor (maternal, fetal, placental) involved:
>1. **Maternal factors**: infection, illness, disease, premature rupture of membranes, bleeding, uterine abnormality, incompetent cervix, previous preterm labor, spontaneous or induced abortion, preeclampsia, short interval pregnancy, trauma, poor nutrition, low socioeconomic status, no prenatal care, extremes of age, low weight, decreased height, lack of rest, excessive fatigue, smoking, extreme emotional stress.
>2. **Fetal factors**: multiple pregnancy, infections, polyhydramnios, congenital adrenal hyperplasia, fetal malformations.
>3. **Placental factors**: placental separation, placental disorder.
>4. **Unknown causes**

