---
tags:
  - B419
title: Collaboration in the Workplace
date: 2024-11-13
description: Collaboration, rooted in the words co and elaborate— combining to mean “work together.” The collaborative process involves a synthesis of different perspectives and expertise to better understand complex problems.
draft: true
---
**Collaboration**, rooted in the words *co* and *elaborate*— combining to mean “**work together**.” The collaborative process involves a **synthesis of different perspectives and expertise** to better understand complex problems.

>[!CITE] Definitions
>"Collaboration is the most formal inter organizational relationship involving shared authority and responsibility for planning, implementation, and evaluation of a joint effort." Marquis and Huston, 2017
>
>"Collaboration is a joint communication and decision-making process with the goal of satisfying the health care needs of a target population." NNCCS, 2012
>
>"Collaboration is a mutually beneficial and well-defined relationship entered into by two or more organizations to achieve common goals." Mattessich, Murray and Monsey, 2001

**Collaboration** is used to **improve patient outcomes**, reduce length of stay, save on costs for both the client and the institution, increasing job satisfaction and retention, and improving teamwork.
1. **Interdisciplinary Collaboration**: the combination of two disciplines, professions, or departments integrated for one plan formulation in regard to practice, research education, and theory.
2. **Multidisciplinary Collaboration**: independent work and decision-making, such as when disciplines work side-by-side on a problem.
3. **Transdisciplinary Collaboration**: multiple disciplines share knowledge and skills across traditional disciplinary boundaries in accomplishing tasks or goals. 
4. **Interprofessional Collaboration**: interactions of two or more disciplines involving professionals who work together, with intention, mutual respect, and commitments for the sake of a more adequate response to a human problem.

Collaboration is necessary because of the **increasing gap between nursing education and nursing service**. Graduate nurses often **lack practical skills** despite significant knowledge of the nursing process and theory. To this end, a partnership between nursing educators and hospital nursing personnel is essential to meet the challenge. This can occur in six models of collaboration:
1. **Preceptorship Model**: practical training is provided by a **preceptor**; a specially trained instructor. The best preceptors volunteer for the role rather than wait to be assigned. The responsibilities of a preceptor include:
	- **Orientation**: agency guidelines, sense of belongingness, establishing learning goals
	- **Provision of opportunities**
	- **Feedback** to both the student and the faculty supervisors. Progress and problems are regularly discussed and evaluated.
2. **Mentorship Model**: mentoring is a **developmental relationship with a more experienced person helping a less experienced person**. This aids in retention as the mentors and mentees develop a personal relationship, aids in staff development and career guidance, and improves job satisfaction.
	- Mentors act as **teachers** (educational expertise), **guiders**, **counselors** (practical expertise), and **advisors**.
>[!WARNING] Preceptors vs. Mentors
>Mentors are often **older** teachers who possess wisdom and experience, with access to career networking. They function as facilitators, guides, advisors, and as role models. They are often chosen, yet are often "**natural**" in their teaching— limited formal preparation is done, and **teaching is done through sharing life and work experience** which also gives way to developing personal friendships. These people do not **evaluate** the students as a preceptor would.

3. **Lecturer Practitioner Model**
4. **Research Joint Appointment**
5. **Clinical School of Nursing Model**
6. **Collaborative Clinical Education Model**