---
tags:
  - B419
title: Introduction to Nursing Leadership and Management
---
**Management** is a universal process used in business, the practice of one's profession, and even day-to-day personal affairs. It coordinates and supervises personnel (or the self) and available resources effectively and efficiently to accomplish organizational goals. **Leadership** (arguably a function of management) is the use of the self as an influencer (**Leader**) of a group to function together to achieve common goals and objectives.
___
# Nursing Management
Management is an old French term meaning "*the directing*". Along with the aforementioned definition, it is also used to design and maintain an internal environment in which people work together in groups that can perform effectively and efficiently towards the attainment of group goals. It may be used in running a business, in practicing one's profession, and even day-to-day interactions.

>[!CITE] Venson (2010)
>Management is a process by which a cooperative group directs actions towards common goals, involving techniques with which a distinguished group of people coordinates the services of people. It also includes moral and ethical standards in the selection of right ends towards which managers should strive.

**Harbinzon and Myers** created a **Three-Fold Concept to Emphasize the Broader Scope of Management**:
1. **Economic Source**: one of the factors of production, together with land, and capital. Industrialization increases, management is substituted by labor and capital. Management of a firm determines, to a large extent, its productivity and profitability.
2. **System of Authority**: management first develops with top individuals determining the course of action for the rank and file. The constitutional management emphasizes definite and consistent concern for policies and procedures in dealing with the working group. A line towards a democratic and participative approach follows as employees receive higher education.
3. **Class and Status System**: from a sociologist's point of view, managers become an elite group of brains and education. This class is based on education and knowledge. Managers continue to expand their horizons in an effort to attain the ultimate in life or goal.
# Theories of Management
## Scientific Management Theory
**Frederick W. Taylor**, the "*father of scientific management*", postulated that workers could be taught "one best way to accomplish a task", and that productivity would increase. He called these principles *scientific management*. This theory employs four principles:
1. **Traditional "*Rule of Thumb*"**: work organization must employ scientific methods. Workers must be given an adequate amount of time in accomplishing their task.
2. **Workers can be hired, trained, and promoted** based on their **competence and abilities**.
3. **Employees are entitled to receiving financial rewards**, and incentives for worked accomplishments because Taylor viewed humans as "*economic animals*" motivated solely by money.
4. **Maintain good interpersonal relationships** between workers and managements. They should be cooperative and interdependent, with the work shared equally.

Taylor's system of work improvement utilized the following steps:
- **Controlled observation** of the worker's performance through time and motion studies
- **Scientific selection of the best workers for each job, and training for the job task**.
- **Paying the worker** to a differential rate
- **Appointing a few of the most highly skilled workers as managers** to plan and prepare the task of workers.
- **Appointing foremen** (supervisors) **for each aspect of the work**.
### Gilbreth's Job Simplification
**Frank Gilbreth** and **Lillian Gilbreth** (the "*first lady of management*") were among the first to use motion-picture films to analyze worker's motion. They emphasized the **benefits of job simplification** and the **establishment of work standards**, as well as the effects of the **incentive wage plans** and **fatigue** on work performance.
### Gantt Charting
Created by **Henry Gantt**, a student of Taylor, a Gantt chart is a timeline for tracking aspects of a project. Gantt advocates for humanitarian management, and is concerned with problems of efficiency. He contributed to scientific management by refining previous work rather than introducing new topics.
## Classical Organization Theories
### Fayol's Principles of Management and Management Process
Also read: [[Nursing Leadership and Management by Luansing#Management Process]]
**Henry Fayol** is known as the "*father of the management process school*". He studied the functions of the managers and concluded that **management is universal**. There are **fourteen principles of management**:
1. **Division of work**
2. **Authority and Responsibility**
3. **Discipline**
4. **Unity of Command**
5. **Unity of Direction**
6. **Subordination of Individual Interest to General Interest**
7. **Remuneration of Personnel**
8. **Balance of Centralization and Decentralization**
9. **Scalar Chain/Chain of Command**
10. **Order**
11. **Equity**
12. **Stability of Tenure of Personnel**
13. **Initiative**
14. **Esprit de Corps** (*Team Spirit*)

The **management process** consists of:
- **Planning**: the determination of philosophy, goals, objectives, policies, procedures, and rules.
- **Organizing**: establishing the organizational structure to carry out plans, e.g. determining the most appropriate type of patient care delivery.
- **Staffing**: recruiting, interviewing, hiring, and orienting staff
- **Directing**: motivating, conflict resolution, delegating, communicating, and collaborating.
- **Controlling**: performance appraisals, fiscal accountability, quality control, legal and ethical control.

### Max Weber's Types of Authority
The *father of organizational management*. Webber conceptualized **three types of authority**:
1. **Traditional Authority**: legitimacy based on long-standing cultural traditions e.g. monarchies.
2. **Charismatic Authority**: authority produced as a by-product of extraordinary personality and charisma.
3. **Rational Authority**: power based on legislature and established rules and regulations.

### Lyndall Urwick's Organizational Theory
She combined the theories of Taylor and Fayol to develop the classic organizational theory. She popularized the term "**span of control and unity of command**"