---
title: Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease
tags:
  - B316
aliases:
  - GERD
---
The **reflux** (backward flow) **of stomach contents into the** [[ANPH/13#Esophagus|esophagus]]. This results in inflammatory changes in the esophageal mucosa: **reflux esophagitis**. Its causes vary, including inappropriate relaxation or decreased tone of the [[ANPH/13#Esophagus|lower esophageal sphincter]] (LES), elevated gastric volume or intra-abdominal pressure, and delayed gastric emptying.
# Assessment Findings
- **Heartburn** (Pyrosis): substernal/retrosternal burning sensation that may radiate to the neck, jaw, and back. This may sometimes mimic the pain felt in [[B316/02#Coronary Artery Disease|coronary artery disease]] or in [[B316/02#Myocardial Infarction|myocardial infarctions]].
- **Dyspepia**: indigestion
- **Regurgitation**: warm fluid travels up the throat with a sour or bitter taste, which also creates a **risk for aspiration**. Assess for crackles in the lungs.
- **Dysphagia** (difficulty) and **Odynophagia** (pain)
- **Water Brash**: excessive production of saliva (**hypersalivation**) mixes with stomach acid, and is then refluxed. This is different with regurgitation as it does not involve undigested food.
- **Esophagitis** and **Barrett's Epithelium**/**Barrett's Esophagus**: abnormal conversion of normally **squamous epithelia to columnar epithelia**. This is **a result of the inflammatory healing process** attempting to become more acid-resistant.
	- These cells can become considered as **pre-malignant** for patients with prolonged GERD.
- Other manifestations:
	- **Chronic cough** (especially nocturnal d/t positioning) from micro-aspiration/aspiration of refluxed gastric contents.
	- **Asthma** either due to aspiration or from neurogenic induction of inflammation.
	- Introduction of gas (secondary): **eructation** (belching), **flatulence** (farting), and **bloating**.
	- **Nausea** and **Vomiting**
# Diagnostic Examination
- **Most Reliable**: (12 to 36 hour) **24-hour Ambulatory pH Monitoring**, wherein a small catheter is placed through the nose and into the distal esophagus. Continuous pH monitoring and recording is performed.
- **Bilirubin Monitoring** is used to measure to bile reflux patterns.
- [[19#Esophagogastroduodenoscopy|EGD Endoscopy]]
- **Esophageal Manometry**: a form of "motility testing" where a water-filled catheter is inserted through the mouth or nose then into the **distal esophagus**, slowly being withdrawn as it **measures the pressure created by the esophagus' peristaltic movements**. However, this is not reliable for a diagnosis of GERD.
# Nursing Interventions
## Diet Therapy
- Limit **food that decrease LES tone** e.g. fat and caffeine, peppermint, **spicy**, **highly seasoned**, **irritating** or **acidic foods** e.g. orange juice and tomatoes, **alcoholic**, and **carbonated beverages** that increase gastric pressure.
- Cease **smoking**
- Consume **four to six small meals a day**. Large meals may induce GERD due to a fuller stomach and increased acid production. **Do not eat or snack in the evening or 2 to 3 hours before bed**.
- **Eat slowly** and **chew thoroughly**. This will reduce belching from swallowing air.
- **Remain upright** for 1 to 2 hours after meals (if possible) to reduce incidence of GERD.
## Lifestyle Changes
- Sleeping with a **left side-lying (decubitus) position** improves acid clearance and acid exposure which improve normal and nocturnal symptoms.
- **Standing or sitting after meals** help reduce episodes.
- Always sleep with your **head elevated 8 to 12 inches** as an aspiration precaution and to reduce the effects of GERD.
- **Reduce weight** if overweight.
- **Avoid wearing constrictive clothing**, and **avoid heavy lifting or exercise** (that increases intra-abdominal pressure)
# Medical Interventions
- **Proton Pump Inhibitors**: the **main treatment for GERD**. This inhibits the proton pump of the parietal cells, which subsequently inhibits acid secretion.
	- Omeprazole (Prilosec), Lansoprazole (Prevacid), Rabeprazole (AcipHex), Pantoprazole (Protonix), Esomeprazole (Nexium)
	- These products may increase intragastric bacterial growth and the risk of infection.
- **Antacids**: these neutralize hydrochloric acid and deactivates pepsin.
	- Aluminum Hydroxide, Magnesium Hydroxide, Maalox, Mylanta
- **Histamine** (H<sub>2</sub>) **Receptor Antagonist**: decreases acid production by the [[ANPH/13#Stomach|parietal cells]].
	- Famotidine (Pepcid), Ranitidine (Zantac), Cimetidine (Tagamet), Nizatidine (Axid)
- **Prokinetic Agents** are used for faster gastric emptying.
	- Bethanechol (Urecholine), Domepridone (Motilium), Metoclopramide (Reglan)
	- Metoclopramide (Reglan) should only be used as a last resort due to its [[B317/04-2|extrapyramidal side effects]].
# Surgical Management
- If required, the **gold standard** for surgical treatment is a **Laparascopic Nissen Fundoplication** where the upper portion (fundus) of the stomach is wrapped around the lower esophagus, creating a secondary sphincter.
- **Stretta Procedure** (Endoscopic Therapy): a non-invasive esophageal reconstruction via an endoscope placed near the gastroesophageal junction, where therapeutic levels of energy produced via radiofrequency pulse is applied to the lower esophageal sphincter (LES), reshaping it.