---
title: Inflammatory Bowel Diseases
tags:
  - MS
description: "Crohn's Disease: the idiopathic inflammation of the small intestines and/or colon, and Ulcerative Colitis: inflammation of the colon or rectum."
aliases:
  - IBD
  - Crohn's Disease
  - Ulcerative Colitis
  - Regional Enteritis
---
# Crohn's Disease
An **idiopathic inflammatory disease of the small intestine** (~60%), **large intestine** (~20%) or **both** (~50%). The most commonly affected site is the **terminal ileum** (~33%).
- It may also be caused by ***Mycobacterium avium subspecies paratuberculosis*** (*M. paratuberculosis*)
- Related to **genetic disposition** from 1st degree relatives.
## Pathology
- Deep fissures (enterocutaneous, enteroenteric) and ulceration develops from inflammation. This results in bowel fistulas, which cause diarrhea and malabsorption.
- Chronic pathologic changes include **thickening** of the bowel wall, which **narrows the bowel lumen and causes strictures**. This results in **obstruction**.
## Assessment Findings
- **Abdominal distention**, **masses**, and **visible peristalsis** from obstruction.
- **Diarrhea**, commonly containing **fat** (*steatorrhea*) and sometimes containing **blood** (*hematochezia*, *melena*).
- **Constant abdominal pain**
- **Low-grade fever**
- **Weight Loss** seen in 80% of clients
# Diagnostic Examination
- **Autoimmune** blood tests: positive Anti-DNA and ANA
## Nursing Interventions
- **Monitor for peritonitis, bowel obstruction, and nutritional and fluid imbalances**
___
# Ulcerative Colitis
Ulceration and inflammation of the colon or rectum. Its cause is **unknown**.
## Assessment Findings
- **Anorexia**, **weight loss**
- **Fever**
- **==Severe diarrhea== with rectal bleeding**, **dehydration**, **anemia**
- **Abdominal pain** and **cramping**
___
# Inflammatory Bowel Disease
|Differences|Crohn's Disease|Ulcerative Colitis|
|-|-|-|
|Depth and Manifestation|Transmural, Patchy|Mucous Ulceration, Continuous|
|Region|Any part; Ileum|Rectum/Cecum|
|Causes|Unknown, Familial, Environmental|Unknown, Familial, Emotions|
|Age, Peak Incidence|15 - 40 y.o.|15 - 25 y.o., 55 - 65 y.o.|
|Bleeding|Minimal; stool contains pus and mucus|Severe; stool contains blood, pus, and mucus.|
|Fistulas|Common (d/t Transmural affectation)|Rare|
|Rectal Involvement|20%|100%|
|Diarrhea|5 - 6 soft loose stools a day|20-30 watery stools a day|
|Abdominal Pain|Present|Present|
|Weight Loss|Present|Present|
|Intervention|Total Parenteral Nutrition|Diet, Total Parenteral Nutrition|
|Medication|Steroids, Azulfidine (Sulfasalazine): antiinflammatory|Steroids, Azulfidine (Sulfasalazine)
|Surgery|(Temporary) Ileostomy|Ileostomy, Proctocolectomy|

## Nursing Interventions
- Maintain **NPO** during the active phase.
- Monitor for **complications** e.g. **severe bleeding**, **dehydration**, and **electrolyte imbalances**.
- Monitor **bowel sounds**
- **Assist in stool and blood studies**
- **Restrict activities**
- Administer **IVF**, **Electrolytes**, and **TPN** as ordered.
- Ileostomy: continuous watery drainage, with digestive enzymes (causes skin irritation)
    - Irrigation (INC)
### Diet Therapy
- Avoid **gas-forming foods**: whole grains, nuts, raw fruits and vegetables (spinach), pepper, alcohol, and caffeine.
- Avoid **milk products**
- Once off NPO, **Clear Liquid Diet** weaned into a **low residue, high protein diet**.
## Medical Interventions
- **Anti-inflammatory Drugs**: Azulfidine (Sulfasalazine)
- **Antibiotics**
- **Steroids** (as anti-inflammatory)
- **Bulk-Forming Agents** (for diarrhea)
- **Vitamin and Iron Supplementation** (to compensate for malabsorption)