---
title: Intestinal Obstruction
tags:
  - MS
description: Intereference of the forward flow of intestinal contents. This may be partial, complete, mechanical (physical blockage), or non-mechanical (neurogenic).
---
Intereference of the forward flow of intestinal contents. This may be partial, complete, mechanical (physical blockage), or non-mechanical (neurogenic).
## Mechanical Intestinal Obstruction
**Physical barriers** to the passage of intestinal contents with subsequent **distention** by fluid and gas. Its causes include:
- **Adhesions**: bands of granulation and scar tissue that develop as a result of inflammation. This encircles the intestines and constricts its lumen.
- **Hernias**: protrusions of organs or structures through a weakened abdominal muscle.
- **Volvulus**: twisting ("knotting") of the intestines.
- **Intussusception**: telescopic insertion of one section of the intestine into another section.
- [[21-1|Inflammatory bowel diseases]], foreign bodies, strictures, neoplasms, and fecal impaction
## Non-Mechanical Intestinal Obstruction
Causes for this are **neurogenic**, **paralytic**, and **adynamic** in nature. This is brought about by the **interference with the nerve or blood supply** to the intestine, resulting in **decreased or absent peristalsis**.
- Handling of the intestines during **abdominal surgery** (paralytic ileus occurs in around half of major abdominal surgeries)
- **Hypokalemia**
- **Peritonitis**
- **Shock**
- **Vascular obstructions** result in intestinal ischemia and gangrene. May be caused by an embolus or atherosclerosis.
# Assessment Findings
**High-pitched bowel sounds** may be heard **above the level of the obstruction**, while **decreased or absent bowel sounds** may be heard **below the level of the obstruction**.
- **Complete Intestinal Obstructions**: cardinal signs include **abdominal pain**, **abdominal distention**, **obstipation**, and **vomiting**. Other signs include **malnutrition**, **flatulence** (from indigestion), **weakness**, **electrolyte imbalances**, and **ascites**.
- **Small Intestine Obstructions**: abdominal discomfort or pain, visible peristaltic waves in upper and middle abdomen, upper or epigastric abdominal distention, nausea and vomiting (early and profuse), obstipation, severe fluid and electrolyte imbalances, metabolic alkalosis

| |Small Intestine Obstructions|Large Intestine Obstructions|
|-|-|-|
|**Pain**|Discomfort, Pain, Peristaltic Waves|Lower Abdominal Cramping|
|**Distention**|Upper/Epigastric|Lower Abdomen|
|**N&V**|(+), profuse and early|minimal or no vomiting (may contain fecal material)|
|**Stool**|Obstipation|Obstipation, potentially ribbon-like stools|
|**Fluid and Electrolyte Imbalances**|Severe|None or Minor|
|**Acid-Base Imbalance**|Metabolic Alkalosis|Metabolic Acidosis|
# Diagnostic Examinations
- **Flat-plate** ([[19#Plain Abdominal X-Ray|KUB]]) and **upright abdominal x-ray** reveal gas and fluid build-up
- **Increased Hgb/Hct, BUN and Creatinine** (all indicative of dehydration)
- **Decreased serum sodium, chlorine, and potassium**.
- [[19#Proctosigmoidoscopy|Sigmoidoscopy]], **Colonoscopy**, **Barium Enema**, **CT Scan**
# Nursing Interventions
- Monitor **fluid and electrolyte balance**. Keep the client on **NPO** and administer **IVF** as ordered.
- Obstruction is often indicative for an **NGT**. **Measure drainage accurately** from the NG/Intestinal Tube.
- Place the patient in a **fowler's position** to relieve pressure from the diaphragm.
- **Encourage nasal breathing** in order to minimize air swallowing, which worsens abdominal distention.
- **Employ comfort measures** associated with **NG intubation** and **intestinal decompression**.
- **Prevent complications**. **==Measure abdominal circumference daily==** to assess for **distention**. Check for signs and symptoms of **peritonitis**, and monitor **urinary output**.
# Medical Management
## Drug Therapy
- **Antiemetics** (relieve vomiting)
- **Antispasmodics** (relieve cramping)
- **Analgesics** (narcotics)
- **Antibiotics** (prevention of infection)
- **Anthelminthic Drugs** (if caused by a [[bolus of ascaris]])
- **Electrolyte Replacement**
# Surgical Management
Depends on the cause, but include:
- **Exploratory Laparotomy**
- **Tumor Resection** followed by anastomosis
- **Adhesiolysis**: destruction of adhesions (scar tissue)