---
title: Diverticulitis
tags:
  - MS
description: Acute inflammation and of diverticulum/diverticula (the outpouching of the mucosal lining of the GIT, often in the colon) caused by trapped fecal material and bacteria.
aliases:
  - Diverticulosis
date: 2024-01-01
---
**Acute inflammation and infection of** [[ANPH/13#Colon|diverticulum]] caused by trapped fecal material and bacteria. If multiple diverticula are affected, it is **diverticulosis**. It may be caused by a **low fiber diet**, **chronic constipation** (both increase pressure on the colon), and **obesity** (alterations in the intestinal microbiome).
# Assessment Findings
- **Dull**, **steady**, and **cramp-like LLQ abdominal pain**. Pain **worsens** with **movement**, **coughing**, or **straining** (increase in abdominal pressure).
- **Low-grade fever**
- **Chronic constipation** with **episodes of diarrhea**
- **Nausea** and **vomiting**
- **Abdominal distention** and **tenderness**
- **Occult bleeding**, **rectal bleeding**, **change in bowel habits**.
- Signs and symptoms of **peritonitis** secondary to perforation and abscess.
# Diagnostic Examination
- [[19#Colonoscopy|Colonoscopy]], [[19#Proctosigmoidoscopy|sigmoidoscopy]] (visualization of the diverticula)
- **Increased WBC**
- Barium enema is contraindicated due to the risk of performative, leakage, and resultant cardiac arrest
# Nursing Intervention
- **Liberal fluid intake** of 2,500 to 3,000 ml/day.
- **Avoid nuts and seeds** as these can be trapped in the diverticula.
- **Bulk-forming laxatives** to restore bowel pattern.
- Administer **IVF** and **Medications** as ordered.
- During episodes of **acute symptom manifestations**,
	- Employ **bed rest** and **NPO** followed by a **clear liquid diet** to let the GIT rest.
	- Avoid **high-fiber food** as these may irritate the mucosa.
	- **Gradually increase fiber** intake as infection and inflammation subsides.