---
title: Hemorrhoids
tags:
  - MS
description: Dilated blood vessels beneath the lining of the skin in the anal canal. These may be internal or external depending on their position in relation to the anal sphincter.
date: 2024-01-01
---
**Dilated blood vessels** beneath the **lining of the skin in the anal canal**. These may be **internal** or **external** depending on their position in relation to the [[ANPH/13#Colon|anal sphincter]]. It may be caused by:
- **Chronic constipation**
- **Pregnancy**
- **Obesity**
- **Prolonged sitting or standing**
- **Wearing constricting clothing**
- Disease conditions like **liver cirrhosis** and **RSCHF**.
# Assessment Findings
- **Constipation** may be induced by the patient voluntarily or involuntarily in an attempt to prevent pain or bleeding associated with defecation.
- **Anal pain and itchiness** and **rectal** (often **bright red**; *hematochezia*) **bleeding**
	- Pain is often more severe in external hemorrhoids. Internal hemorrhoids may prolapse, but are often painless.
- **Mucous anal secretions**
- **Feelings of incomplete evacuation of the anus**
# Nursing Interventions
- **Diet**: high fiber, liberal fluids
- **Bulk-Forming Laxatives**
- **Hot Sitz Bath**, **Warm Compress**, **Witch Hazel Cream** (all used to reduce hemorrhoid size)
- **Nupercaine**, a local anesthetic.
## Pre-operative Care
- Implement a **low-residue diet** and **stool softeners** to reduce stool bulk.
## Post-operative Care
- **Promotion of comfort**: **analgesics**, **side-lying** or **prone** positioning, **hot sitz bath** 12 to 24 hours post-op for healing and comfort.
- **Promotion of elimination**: **stool softeners**, **analgesics** are given before initial defecation post-op; encourage the patient to defecate as soon as the urge is felt. Provide **enemas** as prescribed using a small-bore rectal tube.
## Patient Education
- Clean the rectal area thoroughly after each defecation.
- Use a **sitz bath** at home, especially after defecation.
- **Avoid constipation** via a high-fiber diet, high fluid intake, regular exercise, regular scheduling, and using stool softeners until healing is complete.
- **Notify the physician** if the patient observes **rectal bleeding**, **suppurative** (pus-containing) **drainage**, continued **pain**, and continued **constipation**.
# Surgical Management
- **Hemorrhoidectomy**
- **Sclerotherapy**: closing off veins via a minimally invasive injection of **5% phenol in oil**.
- **Cryosurgery**: cooled gas is used to freeze **external hemorrhoids**.
- **Rubber Band Ligation**: a rubber band is wrapped around **internal hemorrhoids**.