---
title: Liver Cirrhosis
tags:
  - B316
description: A chronic, progressive disease of the liver characterized  by inflammation, fibrosis, and degeneration of the liver parenchymal cells.
---
The **chronic, progressive disease of the liver** characterized by **inflammation, fibrosis, and degeneration of the liver**. Destroyed liver cells are **replaced by scar tissue**, resulting in architectural changes and **malfunction of the liver**.
___
## Laênnec’s Cirrhosis
Associated with **alcohol abuse** and **malnutrition**; characterized by an **accumulation of fat in the liver cells**, progressing to **widespread scar formation**.
## Postnecrotic Cirrhosis
**Severe inflammation of the liver** results in **massive necrosis** as a complication of [[B316/04-1|viral hepatitis]].
## Cardiac Cirrhosis
Resultant from [[right-sided heart failure]] causing [[portal hypertension]]; manifested by **hepatomegaly** with some fibrosis.
## Biliary Cirrhosis
Cirrhosis as an outcome of **obstruction of the biliary tract** (often the common bile duct). This also results in **chronic impairment of bile excretion**.
___
# Assessment Findings
- **Anorexia**, **Weakness**, and **Weight Loss** as a result of dysfunctional metabolism of nutrients and storage of fat-soluble vitamins (ADEK).
- **Fever** in response to tissue injury.
- **Jaundice**, **pruritus**, and **tea-colored urine** all resulting from increased bilirubin in the blood.
- **Hemophilia** as a result of the inability to store Vitamin K and dysfunctional production of clotting factors in the liver.
- **Decreased libido**, **impotence**, **hair loss/thinning**, **testes atrophy**, **gynecomastia** in men from increased peripheral conversion of androgens to estrogen
- **Hirsutism**, **acne**, **deepening of the voice**, and **virilism** in women due to increased androgen.
# Pathology
1. **Portal Hypertension**: plasma shifts into interstitial spaces within the liver due to the increased pressure. This fluid shifts out of the [[Glisson's capsule]] and accumulates in the [[peritoneal cavity]] (ascites).
2. **Dysfunctional Protein Metabolism** results in **hypoalbuminemia**, decreasing oncotic pressure, resulting in **fluid shifting out of the inferior vena cava and into the peritoneal cavity**.
3. **Impaired Adrenal Cortex Hormone Excretion** ([[B316/05#Hypersecretion: ACTH|Hyperaldosteronism]]) results in retention of sodium and fluids.
4. **Esophageal Varices** secondary to pressure applied by portal venous hypertension.
5. **Internal hemorrhoids**, **leg varicosities**, and **dependent edema** all resulting from venous stasis which increases hydrostatic pressure.
# Portal Hypertension Complications
- **Hepatomegaly**: an initial sign form portal hypertension, but **recedes as liver parenchyma is replaced by scar tissue**, resulting in **shrinkage** of the liver.
- **Splenomegaly**: increased back pressure from the blood results in **blood backing up in the** [[spleen]].
- **Hypersplenism**: increased RBC breakdown (moderate anemia), neutropenia, thrombocytopenia.
- **Caput Medusae**: dilated veins over the abdomen.
- **Spider Angioma**: *talengiectasia*; dilated capillaries over the face and anterior trunk due to increased estrogen. Peripheral conversion of androgens produce estrogen. Also observed in pregnancy.
- **Palmar Erythema**: redness of the palms as a result of heightened estrogen levels.
- **Ascites**