---
title: Esophageal Varices
tags:
  - B316
description: Dilated veins in the esophagus, often due to blocked flood flow through the portal vein, where blood flows from parts of the GIT to the liver. These have the risk of rupturing, leading to massive hemorrhaging.
---
Dilated veins in the esophagus, often due to blocked flood flow through the [[ANPH/13#Blood Supply of the Gastrointestinal Tract|portal vein]], where blood flows from parts of the GIT to the liver. **These have the risk of rupturing**, leading to massive hemorrhaging.
___
# Assessment Findings
- **Signs of bleeding**: **Hematemesis**, **Melena**, Hepatosplenomegaly, Jaundice, Ascites, **Signs of Shock** (tachycardia, hypotension, tachypnea, cold clammy skin, level of consciousness)
# Diagnosis
- [[19#Endoscopy|Upper GI Endoscopy]] for visualization
- **Serum liver function test**.
# Nursing Interventions
- **NPO**
- **Blood studies** to determine extent of the effects of bleeding.
- <strong>O<sub>2</sub> Therapy</strong> to maintain adequate blood oxygen.
- **Blood Transfusion** to replace lost blood.
- **Vasopressin** (Pitressin) to maintain blood pressure
- Assist in **NGT** and **Sangstaken-Blakemore Tube** insertion for a balloon tamponade.
	- **Monitor**: **VS q30min**, lumen pressure, drainage, suction, **respiratory distress**. If respiratory distress occurs, pinch the tube at the patient's nose and cut it with scissors, then remove the tube.
	- **Deflate** the esophageal balloon for **~30 minutes every 8 to 12 hours**.
	- Frequent **mouth and nose care**.
# Surgical Intervention
- **Endoscopic Sclerotherapy**, a sclerosing agent is injected into the varix to promote thrombosis and sclerosis.
- **Endoscopic Variceal Ligation** (variceal banding)
- **Shunt Procedures**