---
title: Cholelithiasis
tags:
  - B316
description: Stones in the gallbladder which causes obstruction of the common bile duct, which leads to pain, inflammation (cholecystitis) and lack of bile in the GIT, with an inverse elevation of bile in circulation.
aliases:
  - Gallbladder Stones
  - Gallstones
---
These are commonly found in individuals who are **fat** (obese), **over forty** (due to estrogen therapy), **female**, and **fertile** (use of oral contraceptives). **Gallstones** are primarily composed of **cholesterol** (80%), **bile salts**, calcium, bilirubin, and proteins.
___
# Stone Formation Theory
1. **Metabolic factors** e.g. obesity, pregnancy, [[B316/07-1|DM]], [[B316/08-3#Hypothyroidism|hypothyroidism]] may all lead to the **stagnation of bile** in the gallbladder.
2. The **water content** of bile is **reabsorbed** to an excessive degree, leading to the **formation of salts** (stones).
# Assessment Findings
- Most patients with gallstones are **asymptomatic**. If manifestations do occur, it is often **pain** in the **Epigastric Region and and the RUQ**, lasting for approximately 30 minutes when obstruction occurs.
- **Fever and Leukocytosis** (as a result of inflammation; **cholecystitis**)
- **Charcot Triad**: fever, **jaundice**, **RUQ pain** (ascending **cholangitis**)
- **Fat Intolerance**: resultant steatorrhea, nausea and vomiting, sensation of fullness
- **Pruritus**, **Easy Bruising**, **Dark Amber Urine** (bilirubin elevation in blood)
# Diagnostic Examination
- **Direct bilirubin**, **Transaminase**, **Alkaline Phosphatase**, **WBC**, **Amylase**, **Lipase** are all increased.
- **Oral cholecystogram** (gallbladder series x-ray) is positive for a gallstone.
# Nursing Interventions
- Administer **analgesia** as ordered and monitor for effects.
- Administer **IVF** as ordered
- Provide small, frequent feedings with low fat.
- Relieve **pruritus**.
- Assist in **cholecystectomy** or **choledochostomy**.
## Post-op Considerations
- **Semi-fowler's** or **Side-lying** opposite of incision site; reposition frequently.
- **Splint incisions** when turning, coughing, and deep breathing.
- **Maintain and monitor T-Tube**
	- The tube should be connected to a **closed gravity drainage system**. Avoid kinks, clamping, and pulling on the tube.
	- Expect **300 to 500 ml of bile-colored drainage for the first day**, then **200 ml every day for the following 3 to 4 days**.
	- **Watch out for peritonitis**.
	- Assess the **skin** around the T-tube for **irritation**. **Cleanse and keep dry** frequently.
- **Stool and urine color** can indicate **effectivity of bile flow**.
## Discharge Planning and Education
- **Adherence to dietary restrictions** (low fat)
- **Resumption of ADLs**: avoid heavy lifting for 6 weeks, sexual activity if desired unless contraindicated.
- **Recognition of Signs of Complications**: fever, jaundice, pain (**Charcot triad**), dark urine and pale stools (benchmark of bile excretion), pruritus.
# Medical Management
- **NPO** with **NGT** and **IVF**
- Administration of **fat-soluble vitamins** (ADEK) due to its depletion.
## Pharmacologic Therapy
- **NSAID** (Ketorolac)
- **Narcotic Analgesia** (**Morphine** for pain)
- **Anticholinergics** (Atropine) may also relieve pain
- **Antiemetics**
# Surgical Management
- **Cholecystectomy with choledochotomy**: removal of the gallbladder, and the **insertion of a T-tube into the common bile duct**.
- **Choledochotomy**: opening of the common bile duct, removal of the gallstone, and addition of a **T-Tube** for drainage.
- **Laparoscopic Cholecystectomy**: laparoscopy may be used for uncomplicated cases (and the pt. has had no previous abdominal surgeries).
- **Cholecystostomy**: creation of a stoma on the gallbladder.