---
title: Pancreatitis
tags:
  - B316
description: Inflammation of the pancreas with varying degrees of pancreatic edema, fat necrosis, or hemorrhaging.
---
An inflammatory process affecting the [[ANPH/13#Pancreas|Pancreas]] with varying degrees of pancreatic edema, fat necrosis, or hemorrhaging. Due to this, proteolytic and lipolytic pancreatic enzymes become **activated** in the Pancreas rather than the [[ANPH/13#Colon|duodenum]], which leads to tissue damage and autodigestion of the pancreas. This most occurs in the **middle-aged**, and may be caused by:
- **Alcoholism and alcohol abuse**
- **Biliary Tract Disease/Obstruction**
- **Trauma**, **viral infection**, [[20-3|PUD]], **abscesses**
- **Drug use** (antihypertensives, steroids, thiazide diuretics, antimicrobials, immunosuppresives, oral contraceptives)
- **Metabolic Disorders** (hyperparathyroidism, hyperlipidemia)
- Idiopathic/Autoimmune
___
# Assessment Findings
- **Pain** in the **LUQ** radiating to the back, flank, or substernal areas accompanied by **DOB**. Aggravated by **eating**.
- **Nausea** and **Vomiting**, decreased or absent bowel sounds
- Abdominal tenderness and guarding
- **Grey Turner's Spots** (ecchymoses on flanks)
- **Cullen's Sign** (ecchymoses of periumbilical area)
- Tachycardia
# Diagnostic Examination
- **Increased serum amylase** (>300 [somogyi](https://www.whonamedit.com/synd.cfm/2068.html) units) and **urinary amyllase**
- **Increased blood sugar** and **lipid levels**
- **Decreased serum calcium**
- **CT Scan**: enlarged pancreas
# Nursing Interventions
- Administer **analgesics**, **antacids**, and **anticholinergics** as ordered. Monitor for adverse effects.
- **NPO**, eliminate stimuli to prevent pancreatic excitation.
- **NGT**, assess for drainage
- **Non-pharmacologic pain relief**: positioning (knee-chest, fetal), relaxation techniques and a relaxing environment.
## Discharge Planning and Education
- **Dietary regimen** once oral intake resumes:
	- **High CHO**, **High CHON** (promote healing), and **Low Fat** (due to impaired fat metabolism)
	- Eat **small, frequent meals**.
	- Avoid **caffeine** and **alcohol**.
	- Remain in a relaxed setting and mindset after meals.
- **Reporting Complications or Recurrence**
	- Continued **nausea** and **vomiting**.
	- **Abdominal distention** with increasing fullness.
	- **Persistent weight loss**: instruct patient to regularly monitor weight.
	- **Severe epigastric or back pain**
	- Frothy/foul-smelling bowel movements.
	- Irritability, confusion, **persistent elevation of temperature for two days**.
# Medical Management
- **NPO** to promote GIT rest
- **Peritoneal Lavage**
- **Dialysis** for severe condition
## Pharmacologic Management
- **Analgesia** (Morphine); Demerol is not used due to cerebrotoxicity.
- **Smooth muscle relaxants** (Papaverine, Nitroglycerin) also for pain.
- **Anticholinergics**: decreases pancreatic stimulation
	- Atropine, Propantheline Bromide
- **Antacids**: decreases pancreatic stimulation
- <strong>H<sub>2</sub> antagonists</strong>, **vasodilators**, **calcium gluconate**
