---
title: Endocrine and Pituitary Disorders
tags:
  - "B316"
description: A complex network of glands and organs in the body that controls the release of hormones for metabolism, energy, reproduction, growth, development, responses to injury, stress, and mood.
---
The endocrine system is composed of ductless glands that releases hormones directly into the bloodstream. The major organ of this system is the **hypothalamus**, which controls most of the endocrinal activity of the pituitary gland. It secretes "**releasing hormones**" i.e. **growth hormone-releasing hormone** (GRHR), **corticotropin-releasing hormone** (CRH), **thyrotropin-releasing hormone** (TRH), **gonadotropin-releasing hormone** (GnRH), **prolactin-inhibiting factor** (PIF) and **prolactin-releasing hormone** (PRH).
# Pituitary Gland (Hypophysis)
The pituitary gland is responsible for the production of various hormones, which it then releases based on signals from the hypothalamus. It is subdivided into two lobes:
## Anterior Pituitary Gland (Adenohypophysis; Pars Anterior)
The anterior lobe constitutes 70% of the gland and is found in the **sella turcica**, a depression in the sphenoid bone at the base of the brain. Its secretions include: **growth hormone** (GH), **prolactin** (PRL), **adrenocorticotrophic hormone** (ACTH), **thyroid-stimulating hormone** (TSH), **luteinizing hormone** (LH), **follicle-stimulating hormone** (FSH), **melanocyte-stimulating hormone** (MSH)
## Posterior Pituitary Gland (Neurohypophysis; Pars Posterior)
The posterior lobe constitutes the remaining 30% of the gland. It is responsible for the secretion of **oxytocin** and the **antidiuretic hormone** (ADH; *vasopressin*). However, it does not produce the hormones. It simply stores these hormones which are produced by the **hypothalamus**.
___
# Hyperpituitarism
A chronic, progressive hyperfunctioning of the anterior pituitary results in **over-secretion of hormone/s secreted by the adenohypophysis**. It may be caused by:
- **Benign pituitary adenoma** (tumors)
- **Hyperplasia of the pituitary tissue**
- **Prolactinomas**: prolactin-secreting tumors, accounts for 60 to 80% of all pituitary tumors.
- **Growth hormone-producing adenomas** (tumors) 
## Assessment Findings
- **Acromegaly**, a gradual, marked **enlargement of the bones of the face, jaw, hands, and feet** as a result of [[#Hypersecretion: GH]]. This may also include **diaphoresis**, **hyperglycemia**, **oily skin**, and **hirsutism** (inappropriate male-pattern hair growth in women)
- **Gigantism**, a **proportional overgrowth of all body tissues with remarkable height**. Also a result of [[#Hypersecretion: GH]].
- **Neurologic Manifestation**s:
	- Headaches, somnolence, behavioral changes, seizures, increased ICP symptoms
	- Disturbances in **appetite**, **sleep**, **body temperature**, and **emotional balance**. These are all due to **hypothalamic involvement**.
	- **Visual disturbances** as a result of the involvement of the [[15-1#Visual Pathway|optic chiasm]] situated just above the pituitary gland; **hemianopsia** (loss of a vertical half of vision), **scotoma** (a blind spot), or **blindness**.
## Diagnostic Examination
- **Skull X-ray**, **CT Scan**, **MRI** all for visualization of tumors or hyperplasia.
- **Plasma GH** levels are elevated; normal range for:
	- an **adult male** is **4 to 10 ng/ml**
	- an **adult female** is **1 to 14 ng/ml**
	- **children** have from **10 to 50 ng/ml**
## Nursing Interventions
### Pre-operative Care
**Health Teaching** about the nature of the procedure and what to expect; **nasal catheterization** and **nasal packing** are to be expected for about a day. An **indwelling catheter** will be used for UO monitoring (post-op) as [[B316/08-2#Diabetes Insipidus|diabetes insipidus]] (DI) may be a complication of the surgery from [[#Hyposecretion: ADH|inadequacy of ADH]].
### Post-operative Care
- **Bed rest** for ~24 hours. **Encourage ambulation** the following day.
- **Fowler's position** alleviated ICP and pressure on the suture line; **sneezing, forceful coughing, bending over, and blowing the nose all disturb the suture line** and should be **avoided**.
- Mild analgesics may be used for headaches.
- **Anticipate** [[B316/08-2#Diabetes Insipidus|diabetes insipidus]] (DI): shows increased thirst and excessive urine output with low specific gravity.
	- **Replace fluids and administer IV ADH as ordered**. Resolution within 72 hours is appropriate.
	- **UO of greater than 900 ml in 2 hours**, or a **specific gravity of <1.004** is indicative of DI.
## Medical Management
### Radiation Therapy
### Drug Therapy
- **Bromocriptine** (Parlodel) inhibits the synthesis of GH and Prolactin. It may be used to treat amenorrhea, infertility, galactorrhea, hypogonadism, and Parkinson's disease.
## Surgical Management
- Removal of the pituitary gland; a **transsphenoidal hypophysectomy**.
___
# Growth Hormone (Somatotropin)
The [[growth hormone]] (GH; pars anterior) manages the **growth of body tissues** (*somato-*) **and bone**.
## Hypersecretion: GH
- Results in **gigantism** (disorder appears before fusion of long bone epiphyses, leading to **excessive vertical growth**) in children
- Results in **acromegaly** (disorder appears after fusion of long bone epiphyses, leading to **large extremities and characteristic facies**) in adults
## Hyposecretion: GH
- Results in **dwarfism**, a lack of physical development, resulting in short stature.
___
# Prolactin (Mammotrophic/Lactotrophic Hormone)
The prolactin hormone (PLT) manages **mammary tissue growth and milk production**.
## Hypersecretion: PRL
- **Galactorrhea**: abnormal production and discharge of breast milk
## Hyposecretion: PRL
- **Agalactorrhea**: lactational insufficiency; decreased or absent milk production during lactational periods.
___
# Adrenocorticotrophic Hormone (ACTH)
This hormone signals for the [[B316/09-1#Adrenal Cortex|adrenal cortex]] to secrete the adrenal hormones **cortisol** (the "stress" hormone) and **aldosterone** (the "salt-saving" hormone). The primary affected hormone in disorders related to ACTH is cortisol, but aldosterone may also be affected.
- **Cortisol** is a glucocorticoid, which **increases the breakdown of fat and protein for energy use** and **reduces inflammatory and immune responses**. It is released in response to waking up, exercise, or stressful events.
- **Aldosterone** is a mineralocorticoid, which **increases water and sodium retention** (hence "salt-saving"), and **potassium to be excreted**. It is indirectly involved with blood volume (and pressure) control.
Further discussed: [[B316/09-2|Pheochromocytoma]], [[B316/09-3|Cushing's Syndrome]], [[B316/09-4|Addison's Disease]].
## Hypersecretion: ACTH
Overproduction of ACTH increases **cortisol levels in the blood**. This results in [[B316/08#Cushing's Syndrome|Cushing's Syndrome]]. This results in increased serum ACTH and cortisol levels, mild hypernatremia, hypokalemia, and hyperglycemia (all as a result of the function of cortisol). Clients with long-standing ACTH have an **obese trunk and pendulous abdomen** with **thin extremities**.
## Hyposecretion: ACTH
A decrease in ACTH results in **inadequate cortisol levels in the blood**. This results in [[B316/08#Addison's Disease|Addison's Disease]]. This results in decreased ACTH and cortisol levels, hyponatremia and hypovolemia, hyperkalemia, acidosis, and hypoglycemia.
___
# Thyroid Stimulating Hormone (TSH)
**TSH** stimulates the thyroid (real) to secrete <strong>T<sub>3</sub></strong> (Triiodothyronine) used for metabolism and growth, and <strong>T<sub>4</sub></strong> (Thyroxine, Tetraiodothyronine) used for catabolism and body heat production.
Further discussed on [[B316/08-3#Thyroid Disorders|Thyroid Disorders]]
## Hypersecretion: TSH
**Hyperthyroidism** (*Thyrotoxicosis*)  e.g. Grave's Disorder, Basedow's Disorder, Exophthalmic Goiter, Diffuse Toxic Goiter. An increase in thyroid hormones
## Hyposecretion: TSH
**Hypothyroidism**. A decrease in thyroid hormones. Halting their processes, **a notable decrease in metabolism and body heat production** is noted. **Physical and mental reactions are slow, and apathy may be observed; a dull, expressionless, mask-like face**.

___
# Gonadotropins
The gonadotropins, **Follicle Stimulating Hormone** (FSH), **Luteinizing Hormone** (LH), affect **growth**, **maturity** and the **functioning of the primary and secondary sex characteristics**. These affect the gonads (ovaries and testes), which in turn produces **estrogen**, **progesterone**, and **testosterone**.
## Hypersecretion: Gonadotropins
Due to their role in the **development of sex characteristics**, too many gonadotropins will result in **precocious puberty**.
## Hyposecretion: Gonadotropins
Inadequate gonadotropin production results in the **delay or lack of sexual development** results in **impotence and substandard spermatogenesis** for men, and **the absence of ovulation, menstruation, and resultant infertility** in women.
___
# Melanocyte Stimulating Hormone (MSH)
[[Melanocytes]] are cells responsible for the production of melanin (pigment) production.
## Hypersecretion: MSH
Overproduction of melanin results in **hyperpigmentation of the skin**, giving it a **bronze-like appearance**.
## Hyposecretion: MSH
Underproduction of melanin results in **hypopigmentation of the skin**, giving it a **pale appearance** (**albinism**), either entirely or in patches.
___
# Antidiuretic Hormone (ADH; Vasopressin)
The antidiuretic hormone **counteracts diuresis by stimulating fluid retention** in the kidneys (yet not affecting sodium excretion). It also causes **vasoconstriction** (hence the name "*vasopressin*").
Further discussed: [[B316/08-2|Diabetes Insipidus (DI)]] and [[B316/08-1|Syndrome of Inappropriate Antidiuretic Hormone (SIADH)]]
## Hypersecretion: ADH
- Persistently high levels of ADH in without any stimulation results in the **excessive retention of water**, also known as the **syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone** (SIADH).
## Hyposecretion: ADH
- Inadequate ADH production results in the inability for the urinary system to concentrate urine (renal tubes to retain water), causing **excessive fluid loss**. This condition is known as **Diabetes Insipidus** (DI, meaning "bland urine" in contrast to [[Diabetes Mellitus]], meaning "sweet urine").
___
# Oxytocin
**Released during childbirth to incite uterine contraction**. It is also responsible for **the** [[Let Down Reflex]] **of milk ejection**, which is why breastfeeding can aid in uterine contraction.
## Hypersecretion: Oxytocin
Oxytocin toxicity result in an overactive uterus, resulting in hypertrophy. This, in pregnancy, may result in [[intrauterine growth retardation]].
## Hyposecretion: Oxytocin
Hyposecretion of oxytocin is rare; this will result in the inability of the uterus to contract ([[uterine atony]]) and a defect in milk ejection (due to oxytocin's role in the let-down reflex).