---
tags:
  - B316
title: Diabetes Insipidus
aliases:
  - DI
description: A disorder of the posterior pituitary gland, resulting in a deficiency of ADH and a consequent inability to concentrate urine.
---
A disorder of the [[posterior pituitary gland]] resulting in deficient antidiuretic hormone (ADH, vasopressin) production. This results in **large volumes of dilute urine** to be excreted, even when dehydrated. **Polydipsia** follows.
- May occur secondary to [[head trauma]], brain tumors, and surgical ablation or irradiation of the pituitary gland.
- May also follow infection of the [[central nervous system]] ([[meningitis]], [[encephalitis]], [[tuberculosis]]), or with other tumors (metastatic disease, lymphoma of the breast or lung).
- **Failure of the renal tubules to respond to ADH** (nephrogenic form of DI) may also cause DI, resulting from [[hypokalemia]], [[hypercalcemia]], and a variety of medications eg. **lithium**, demeclocycline (Declomycin) 
___
# Clinical Manifestations
- **Polyuria**: excessively dilute urine, reaching a [[Normal Values#Urine Specific Gravity (1.005 - 1.030 kg/m³)|specific gravity]] of **1.001 to 1.005**. Even when dehydrated, the patient will continue to produce excessive urine. This may lead to **dehydration** and **hypernatremia** without adequate .
- **Polydipsia**: intense thirst, especially for cold water, which may reach up to 20 liters of consumption in a single day.
- **Onset**: may begin at birth if inherited, while onset may either be insidious or abrupt in adults.
___
# Assessment Findings
- **Fluid Deprivation Test**: fluids are withheld for 8 to 12 hours until 3% to 5% of body weight is lost. **Urine specific gravity and osmolality is measured** during the duration. In DI, **urine concentration does not increase with increasing dehydration**.
- **Plasma ADH** and **plasma/urine osmolality**
- A trial of **desmopressin** (synthetic vasopressin) **therapy** and an **intravenous infusion of a hypertonic saline solution** may also be performed.
____
# Nursing Management
- **Client and family education** on follow-up care and emergency measures:
	- Provide **verbal and written instructions**, including the **actions and adverse effects of all medications** being used.
	- Demonstrate **correct medication administration** and observe return demonstrations.
-  Advise the patient to wear a **medical identification bracelet** and a **disorder information card** at all times.
___
# Medical Management
1. **Replace ADH**
2. **Replace fluids**
3. **Correct underlying intracranial pathology** (if applicable/possible). **Nephrogenic causes** require different management approaches.
## Pharmacologic Treatment
1. **Desmopressin (DDAVP) Intranasal od or bid** to control symptoms.
2. **ADH (vasopressin tannate in oil) IM q24hr to q96hr** reduces urinary volume
	- Should be **shook vigorously** or **warmed**, **administered in the evening**, and **rotated between sites to prevent lipodystrophy**.
3. **Clofibrate (Atromid-S)**: a hypolipidemic agent, but has been **found to produce an antidiuretic effect when patients have residual hypothalamic vasopressin**.
4. **Chlorpropamide (Diabinese)** and **Thiazide Diuretics** potentiate the action of vasopressin, and as such is used for milder forms of DI.
5. **Thiazide Diuretics**, **Mild Salt Depletion**, **Prostaglandin Inhibitors (Ibuprofen, Indomethacin, Aspirin)** are used for the **nephrogenic form** of DI.
