---
tags:
  - MS
title: Thyroid Disorders
description: "The butterfly-shaped organ anterior to the trachea: the thyroid gland, responsible for production of thyroid hormones."
---
A butterfly-shaped organ, the **thyroid gland** is located anterior to the trachea, and inferior to the larynx. Its central area is the **isthmus** flanked by the wing-like left and right lobes. Each lobe is embedded with a **parathyroid gland** (primarily on the posterior surface). **Thyroid tissue** is composed primarily of **thyroid follicles**, a central cavity surrounded by **epithelial follicle cells**. The central cavity is filled with **colloid**, where hormone synthesis primarily occurs.
___
# Thyroid Hormone Synthesis and Secretion
**Iodine**, an essential and unique component of thyroid hormones, attaches to a **glycoprotein**, produced by follicle cells, within the **colloid**.
1. **TSH** binds to its receptors in the follicle cells, stimulating the **active transport of iodide ions** across their cell membranes, resulting in the **concentration of iodide ions** within the follicular cells.
2. Iodide ions move to the **lumen of the follicle** bordering the colloid, where oxidation (removal of negative charge) occurs. **Oxidation of two iodide ions (I<sup>-</sup>) results in iodine (I<sub>2</sub>) formation**.
3. In the colloid, **peroxidase enzymes** link **iodine** and **tyrosine amine acids** in **thyroglobulin** to produce two intermediaries:
	- Tyrosine attached to one iodine
	- Tyrosine attached to two iodine
4. Linkage of either of these intermediaries through covalent bonds result in the formation of thyroid hormones:
	- Two tyrosine with three total iodine: **Triiodothyronine** (T<sub>3</sub>). It is more potent than T<sub>4</sub>, and many cells even convert T<sub>4</sub> to T<sub>3</sub> through the removal of an iodine atom.
	- Two tyrosine with four total iodine (more common): **Tetraiodothyronine** (T<sub>4</sub>) also known as **Thyroxine**
5. These compounds remain in the colloid center until **endocytosis** occurs from TSH stimulation. Lysosomal enzymes break apart the **thyroglobulin colloid**, **releasing free T<sub>3</sub> and T<sub>4</sub>** that **diffuse** across the follicle cell membrane, entering the bloodstream.
6. Less than 1% of circulating thyroid hormones remain **unbound** and can cross the lipid bilayer of cell membranes. The remaining 99%+ of thyroid hormones are bound to specialized transport proteins called **thyroxine-binding globulins** (TBGs), to albumin, or other plasma proteins. This allows for a buffer for **when thyroid hormone levels decrease**, and **bound thyroid hormones are unbound**.
7. Regulation of these processes are done by the **TSH** released by the **anterior pituitary gland**, which is in turn regulated by the **thyrotropin-releasing hormone** (TRH) from the **hypothalamus**.
	- A **negative feedback system** is employed for all of these hormones (T<sub>3</sub>, T<sub>4</sub>, TSH, TRH) as increasing levels of thyroid hormones in the blood stream decrease their production.
	- **TRH** is released when plasma levels of T<sub>3</sub>, and T<sub>4</sub> (and subsequently metabolic processes) are decreased.
___
# Thyroid Hormone Functions
1. **Metabolism**: these hormones are also commonly known as "**metabolic hormones**" because of their influence on the body's [[basal metabolic rate]]. While the processes stimulated by these hormones do produce ATP, it is often in an **inefficient manner**. As a result, an abnormally increased level of heat is released (**body heat**) as byproducts from the reactions termed as the **calorigenic effect**.
	- **Mitochondria**, the powerhouse of the cell, have **receptors which thyroid hormones bind** to. This leads to an increase in nutrient breakdown and the use of oxygen to produce ATP.
	- The hormones also initiate the **transcription of genes involved in glucose oxidation**.
2. Thyroid hormones also play a part in **protein synthesis** and **fetal and childhood tissue development and growth, especially critical for the normal development of the nervous system**. They continue to support neurological function into adulthood.
3. Thyroid hormones have a **complex interrelationship with reproductive hormones**. Deficiency may influence **libido**, **fertility**, and other aspects of **reproductive function**.
4. **Catecholamine sensitivity** is affected by **upregulation of receptors in the blood vessels**. Increases in thyroid hormones result in increases in the beta<sub>1</sub>-adrenergic receptors for norepinephrine and epinephrine, resulting in a stronger response (**increased heart rate, heart contraction, and blood pressure**)
___
# Hyperthyroidism
A hyperthyroid state resulting from hypersecretion of the thyroid hormones (triiodothyronine and thyroxine). It may be caused by:
- **Graves' Disease**: autoimmune derivation; circulating anti-TSH autoantibodies that **displace TSH from and activate the thyroid receptors**.
	- Associated with **Hashimoto's Disease** a state of chronic inflammation of the thyroid gland that *usually* causes [[hypothyroidism]].
- **Thyrotoxicosis** (excessive thyroid hormones) may result from autoimmune diseases, functional thyroid adenomas, and infection.
## Complications
1. **Thyrotoxicosis**, or a **Thyroid Crisis**/**Thyroid Storm** is a sudden exacerbation of symptoms of hyperthyroidism that often occur with infection or stress. Immediate hospitalization is required.
	- **Fever**
	- **Decreased Mental Alertness**
	- **Abdominal Pain**
2. **Heart-related Complications**: tachycardia, [[congestive heart failure|CHF]], atrial fibrillation
3. **Increased risk for osteoporosis** in long-lasting hyperthyroidism.
4. **Complications secondary to surgical management**:
	- Scarring of the neck
	- Vocal hoarseness due to nerve damage to the voice box.
	- [[Hypocalcemia]] due to parathyroid damage.
5. **Complications secondary to other managements**: radioactive iodine, and hormone replacement therapy also have other potential complications.
## Assessment Findings
1. **Enlarged Thyroid Gland** (Goiter) e.g. in Graves' disease, autoimmune disorders
2. **Palpitations**, **Cardiac Dysrhythmias** (tachycardia or even atrial fibrillation in severe cases), **Hypertension**, increased cardiac output: increased thyroid hormones stimulate the heart.
3. **Exophthalmos** (bulging eyes) may be present, particularly in those with Graves' disease. This results from swelling of the tissues around the eyes.
4. **Heat Intolerance**: increased body heat results in being less tolerance even to warm environments.
5. **Diaphoresis**: heightened metabolic activity and body temperature.
6. **Weight Loss**: heightened metabolic activity results in increased energy expenditure despite an increase in appetite.
7. **Diarrhea**: gastrointestinal motility may be enhanced by hyperthyroidism.
8. **Smooth and soft skin and hair**: thyroid hormones stimulate skin cell regeneration and hair keratin production (integumentary effects).
9. **Nervousness**, **Fine Tremors of the Hands**: nervous system stimulation by the thyroid hormones.
10. **Personality Changes**, **Mood Swings**, **Irritability**, and **Agitation**: neurotransmitters in the brain and the nervous interact with thyroid hormones.
11. **Oligomenorrhea** (irregular menstrual periods) as thyroid hormones are involved in the regulation of the menstrual cycle.
## Diagnostic Examination
- **Primary Nursing Diagnosis**: ==Activity intolerance related to exhaustion and fatigue==
- **TSH Assay** reveals decreased levels (normally 0.5 to 1.5 mU/L) of TSH as the body attempts to regulate elevated thyroid hormones.
- **T<sub>3</sub>** and **T<sub>4</sub>** radioimmunoassay show elevations reflecting overproduction. These values are also used to monitor effect of therapy.
	- Triiodothyronine levels are normally ==80 to 230 ng/dL==. These levels are lower than T<sub>4</sub> as T<sub>3</sub> has a greater effect on the body.
	- Thyroxine levels are normally ==5.0 to 12.0 μg/dL==.
- 24 hour Radioactive Iodine Uptake
- Thyroid Autoantibody Testing
- Antithyroglobulin
- Electrocardiogram
## Medical Management
(a) **Reduction of thyroid hyperactivity** for symptomatic relief and (b) **removing the cause of complications**
1. **Irradiation** via radioactive Iodine (<sup>131</sup>I or <sup>123</sup>I) of overactive thyroid cells. This is the most common form of treatment for the elderly, but is **contraindicated in pregnancy and nursing mothers**. Iodine may cross the placenta and is secreted in breast milk.
2. **Pharmacotherapy**: **Antithyroid** medications that **inhibit hormone synthesis/release** or **reduce the amount of thyroid tissue**.
	- **Propylthiouracil; PTU (Propacil)** and **Methimazole (Tapazole)** are the most common, used until thyroid hormones are normal. Both of these drugs inhibits the ability of the thyroid to utilize iodine. A **maintenance dose** is established followed by a gradual withdrawal for several months. **Contraindicated for late pregnancy** due to risk for **goiter and cretinism in the fetus**.
3. **Surgery**: removal of most of the thyroid gland; no longer the preferred choice of therapy for Graves' disease, but is still used for patients who **cannot tolerate antithyroid drugs**, have **significant ophthalmopathy**, have **large goiters**, or cannot undergo **radioiodine therapy**.
### Adjunctive Therapy
1. **Potassium Iodide**, **Lugol's Solution**, and **Saturated Solution of Potassium Iodide** (SSKI) may also be added to induce the **Wolff-Chaikoff Effect**, a protective mechanism as a result of elevated iodine levels, where thyroid peroxidase (used for synthesis of hormones) downregulation occurs to prevent excessive production from iodine saturation.
2. **Beta-Adrenergic Agents** (Propanolol) may be used to **reduce effects of hyperthyroidism on the sympathetic nervous system** e.g. nervousness, tachycardia, tremors, anxiety, and heat intolerance.
## Nursing Interventions
1. Provide **adequate rest** (activity intolerance)
2. Administer **sedatives** as prescribed.
3. Provide a cool and quiet environment
4. Obtain **daily weight**.
5. Provide a high-calorie diet (increased metabolism)
6. Administer **antithyroid medications**, **iodine preparations**, or **propanolol** as prescribed.
7. Prepare for **radioactive iodine therapy** as ordered.
8. Prepare for **thyroidectomy** as ordered.
### Documentation
- **Physical Findings**: cardiovascular status (resting pulse, blood pressure, presence of angina or palpitations), bowel activity, edema, condition of skin, activity tolerance, **hypermetabolism**, **eye status**, **heat intolerance**.
- **Medication Response**, skin care regimen, nutrition, body weight, comfort level
- **Psychosocial Response** to changes in bodily function, mental acuity, **behavioral patterns**, emotional stability.
### Discharge Education
- **Disease Process**: the role of the thyroid gland, disease, treatment plan, and its side effects.
- **Medications**: thorough explanation of all medications (dosage, route, action, adverse effects, monitoring).
	- Take **PTU or Methimazole with meals** to limit gastric irritation.
	- Mix **iodine solutions with milk or juice** to limit gastric irritation. **Use a straw** to minimize risk for teeth discoloration.
- **Complications**: have the patient report any manifestations of **thyrotoxicosis** (tachycardia, palpitations, shakiness, tremors, DOB, N&V), **neck swelling**, **dysphagia**, or **weight loss** immediately.
___
# Hypothyroidism
**Suboptimal levels of thyroid hormones in the body** results in hypothyroidism.
- This commonly occurs in patients with overcorrection of **previous hyperthyroidism** treated with radioiodine, antithyroid medications, or thyroidectomy.
- It more often occurs in **older women**, and also by virtue of thyroid cancer experienced by men who have undergone radiation therapy for head and neck cancer.
- **Myxedema**, a dermatologic condition found in severe hypothyroidism, is a state where an accumulation of mucopolysaccharides in subcutaneous and other interstitial tissues occur (generalized edema). (Myxedema is also sometimes used interchangeably with severe hypothyroidism)
## Classifications 
- **Primary**/**Thyroidal Hypothyroidism**: failure of the **thyroid** to produce adequate thyroid hormones. This is found in ~95% of patients with hypothyroidism.
- **Central Hypothyroidism**: failure of the **pituitary gland** and/or the **hypothalamus** to stimulate the production of thyroid hormones.
- **Secondary**/**Pituitary Hypothyroidism**: an entirely pituitary disorder, leading to decreased TSH secretion, and subsequent decreased T<sub>3</sub> and T<sub>4</sub> production.
- **Tertiary**/**Hypothalamic Hypothyroidism**: a hypothalamic disorder wherein thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) is not produced, and the release of TSH is inhibited, resulting in decreased T<sub>3</sub> and T<sub>4</sub> production.
## Causes
- The most common (general) cause is **thyroid inflammation**, damaging the gland's cells.
- **Autoimmune diseases** is the most common cause of hypothyroidism in adults (**autoimmune thyroiditis**) or **Hashimoto's Disease**.
- **Thyroid Atrophy** occurs naturally when aging.
- **Hyperthyroidism Therapy** may result in hypothyroidism, such as in **radioiodine therapy**, and **thyroidectomy**.
- **Medications** such as **lithium**, **iodine compounds**, and **antithyroid medications** decrease TSH production.
- **Iodine Deficiency**: iodine is an essential component of thyroid hormones.
- **Iodine Excess**: iodine saturation results in suppression of thyroid hormone production (inhibition of thyroid peroxidase) as a protective mechanism against hyperthyroidism (Wolff-Chaikoff Effect).
## Complications
- **Myxedema Coma**: a decompensated state of severe hypothyroidism in which the patient becomes hypothermic and unconscious.
## Assessment Findings
1. **Extreme Fatigue**: due to hypometabolism
2. **Menstrual Disturbances** (Menorrhagia, Amenorrhea): thyroid hormones have complex interrelationships with reproductive hormones and function.
3. **Weight Gain**: due to hypometabolism
4. **Cold Intolerance**: decreased body heat results in intolerance to cold environments.
5. **Thick Skin**: generalized accumulation of mucopolysaccharides in subcutaneous tissue results in the thickening of the skin.
6. **Irregular Thyroid Gland**: palpation of they thyroid gland is routine. Enlargement or atrophy should be noted.
## Diagnostic Examination
1. **Physical Examination**: palpation of the thyroid gland in all patients.
2. **Serum TSH Test**: the **single-best screening test** for thyroid function due to its high sensitivity. Normal TSH levels are 0.5 to 1.5 mU/L.
3. **Serum Thyroid Hormones Tests** include both protein-bound and free hormone levels in response to TSH secretion.
4. **Thyroid Antibody Testing**: immunoassay techniques look for antithyroid antibodies which are active in all case of **Hashimoto's Thyroiditis**.
## Medical Management
The primary objective is to restore normal metabolic status through hormone replacement. Prevention of complications and supportive therapy are included.
1. **Pharmacologic therapy**: **Synthetic Levothyroxine** is the preferred preparation for hypothyroidism and suppression of non-toxic goiters.
2. **Prevention of Cardiac Dysfunction**: subnormal metabolism result in decreased oxygen requirements. Reductions in blood supply may be tolerated without overt symptoms, but coronary artery disease may become evident once metabolism is restored to normal status.
3. **Supportive Therapy**: **oxygen saturation** is monitored, **fluids are administered cautiously** (due to fluid retention), **external heat application** should be avoided, and **oral thyroid hormone therapy** should be continuous.
## Nursing Interventions
### Assessment
- **Palpation** from an anterior and posterior position, assessing for any abnormalities, firmness (Hashimoto's) or tenderness (thyroiditis)
- **Auscultation** of the thyroid gland if any abnormalities are palpated.
### Diagnoses and Interventions
- **Activity Intolerance** related to decreased physiological and psychological energy
	- Promote **rest** and **self-care activities**.
- **Risk for impaired thermoregulation**
	- Provide **thermoregulation precautions**: blankets, no external heat sources, temperature monitoring, avoiding exposure to drafts, etc.
- **Constipation** related to decreased gastrointestinal peristalsis
	- Encourage **fluid and dietary fiber intake**. **Mobility** should be encouraged within tolerable limits, and use of laxatives or enemas should be used sparingly. Monitor bowel activity.
- **Impaired breathing** associated with depressed ventilation.
	- Assess **respiratory parameters** (depth, rate, pattern, oximetry, ABG)
	- Encourage **deep breathing**, **coughing**, and [[incentive spirometry]].
	- **Verify any hypnotics or sedatives being ordered**. If necessary, monitor for adverse side effects.
	- If necessary, **suctioning and mechanical ventilation** may be done.
- **Acute confusion** associated with altered cardiovascular and respiratory status and depression.
	- **Orient** the patient to the four spheres: person, place, time, situation
### Discharge Education
1. **Medication Compliance**: emphasis of compliance with life-long therapy.
2. **Thermoregulatory Precautions**: avoid extreme cold until condition is stable.
3. **Follow-up Care**: state the importance of follow-up care.
4. **Weight Reduction Strategies** and **Prevention of Constipation**: identify strategies with the patient e.g. a high-fiber, low-calorie and adequate fluid diet.