---
tags:
  - MS
title: The Adrenal Gland
description: The adrenal glands, both their inner (adrenal medulla) and outer (adrenal cortex) portions secrete various hormones as regulated by the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis. It is a part of the autonomic nervous system.
date: 2024-01-01
---
Each individual normally has two adrenal glands, both situated atop each kidney. These glands are divided into two portions: the central **adrenal medulla** and the outer **adrenal cortex**. Each secrete different hormones and are used for different functions.
___
# Adrenal Medulla
The adrenal medulla serves as a part of the autonomic nervous system. ==**Stimulation of preganglionic sympathetic nerve fibers**==, which directly travel to the cells of the adrenal medulla, causes the release of **catecholamine hormones** **epinephrine and norepinephrine**. About 90% of the secretions of the adrenal medulla is **epinephrine**, also known as **adrenaline**.
- These **catecholamines** are used to regulate metabolic pathways for catabolism of stored fuels to meet caloric needs with endogenous sources. This is often utilized to prepare for a challenge (**fight-or-flight response**).
- They also **reduce blood flow to tissues not necessary for the emergency response** e.g. decreased blood flow to the GIT in order to shunt blood towards more "necessary" tissues like cardiac and skeletal muscles.
- Induction of the **release of free fatty acids**, increase the **basal metabolic rate**, and **blood glucose level**.
___
# Adrenal Cortex
A functioning adrenal cortex is **necessary for life**. Adrenocortical secretions allow for adaptation to all kinds of stress.
## Glucocorticoids
The prototypal glucocorticoid is **hydrocortisone**; the hormone is cortisol. These have an important influence on glucose metabolism (as evident by its name).
- **Increased hydrocortisone secretion** results in **elevated blood glucose levels**.
- Glucocorticoids are secreted **in response to ACTH secretion** from the anterior pituitary gland which utilizes a **negative feedback system**: glucocorticoids in the blood inhibit corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) from the hypothalamus, which then inhibits ACTH secretion from the anterior pituitary gland.
- Glucocorticoids are used in medicine in the form of **corticosteroids** to **inhibit inflammatory responses to tissue injury and to suppress allergic manifestations** (immunosuppressant). However, they have various side effects:
	- [[MS/25-1|Diabetes Mellitus]], osteoporosis, [[MS/20-3|Peptic Ulcers]], muscle wasting (from protein breakdown), poor wound healing, and redistribution of body fat.
	- **Large amounts of exogenous glucocorticoids inhibit ACTH** and endogenous glucocorticoids, which may result in **adrenal cortex atrophy**. Sudden discontinuation of corticosteroid administration may result in insufficiency due to the inability of an atrophied adrenal cortex to respond adequately.
## Mineralocorticoids
Mainly in the form of **aldosterone**, the *salt-saving* hormone. As its name suggests, its major effect is on **electrolyte metabolism**.
- These act principally on the **renal tubules and GI epithelium** to **increase sodium (cation) absorption in exchange for potassium or hydrogen (anions) excretion**. It may be released in response to **decreased blood pressure** and **dehydration**; it may also be released in response to **hyperkalemia** due to its potassium-wasting characteristic.
- Compared to glucocorticoids, **ACTH only minimally affects aldosterone secretion**. Instead, **Angiotensin II** (an arteriolar vasoconstrictor) presence in the bloodstream is what primarily stimulates its secretion. Angiotensin II, in turn, is resulting from the **RAAS system**.
## Adrenal Sex Hormones
**Androgens** are the third major type of steroid hormones produced by the adrenal cortex, whose effects are similar to those of male sex hormones.
- The adrenal cortex may also secrete **small amounts of female sex hormones** (estrogens).
- **ACTH** also controls the production of adrenal sex hormones.
- Adrenal androgens have minimal effects when at normal levels, but may cause **masculinization**; **androgenital syndrome** if produced in excess such as in inborn enzyme deficiencies.