---
tags:
  - MS
title: Pheochromocytoma
description: A tumor, often benign, originating from the chromaffin cells of the adrenal medulla (90%) or in extra-adrenal chromaffin tissue in other organs (10%).
date: 2024-01-01
---
**Pheochromocytoma** is a tumor (90% benign, 10% malignant; 10% bilateral) originating from the **chromaffin cells of the adrenal medulla** (90% of cases) or from **extra-adrenal chromaffin cells** found in other tissues e.g. the aorta, ovaries, spleen.
- These tumors may arise in any age, but peaks from ==**40 to 50 years of age**==.
- There is a high incidence of pheochromocytomas between family members; **family members of any affected individual should be screened for the tumor**.
- Its familial form may be part of **multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2** (MEN2), and as such should be considered in patients who have **medullary thyroid carcinoma** and **parathyroid hyperplasia/tumor**.
- **Pheochromocytoma results in hypertension** for 0.1% of patients with hypertension. Though rare, it is a form of hypertension that is curable by surgery. If unmanaged, it is often fatal.
___
# Assessment Findings
- **Triad**: **headache**, **diaphoresis**, **palpitations** in patients with hypertension.
- **Hypertension**, either intermittent or persistent, among **other cardiovascular disturbances** are common.
- Other symptoms may include **tremors**, **flushing**, and **anxiety**.
- **Hyperglycemia** may result from **epinephrine secretion stimulating liver and muscle glycogen conversion to glucose**. **Insulin** may be required to maintain normal blood glucose levels.
### Paroxysmal Form of Pheochromocytoma
- **Paroxysms** are acute, unpredictable attacks lasting from seconds to hours. The patient may become **extremely anxious, tremulous, and weak**. These symptoms **begin abruptly but subside slowly**.
- **Headache**, **vertigo**, **blurring of vision**, **tinnitus**, **air hunger**, **dyspnea**.
- **Polyuria**, **nausea and vomiting**, **diarrhea**, **abdominal pain**, and feelings of **impending doom**.
- **Palpitations**, and **tachycardia**
- **Life-threatening Hypertension**: 250/150 mmHg
- **Postural Hypotension**: systolic blood pressure drops, leading to lightheadedness or dizziness upon standing.
___
# Diagnostic Examination
- **Urine and plasma catecholamine and metanephrine** (MN, a catecholamine metabolite) **testing** are the most direct and conclusive.
- If results for the previous tests are **inconclusive**, a **clonidine suppression test** may be performed.
- **Imaging studies** (CT, MRI, UTZ, <sup>131</sup>I-metaiodobenzylguanidine \[MIBG] scintigraphy) can **localize the pheochromocytoma, and if there are multiple present**.
___
# Medical Management
- **Control**: **==ICU Admission==** for ECG monitoring and the use of **alpha-adrenergic blocking agents** e.g. **phentolamine** (**Regitine**) or **smooth muscle relaxants** e.g. **sodium nitroprusside** (**Nipride**). These are for control hypertension. Patient preparation often takes 4 to 7 days.
- **Treatment**: ==**Adrenalectomy**== for affected adrenal glands.
- **Post-bilateral adrenalectomy**, **==corticosteroid replacement==** is required. Maintain careful attention for **hypotension** and **hypoglycemia**.
___
# Nursing Management
- **Monitor ECG changes**, **arterial pressures**, **fluid and electrolyte balance**, and **blood glucose levels**.
- For **urine testing**, **give verbal and written instructions** on collecting a 24-hour urine specimen.
- Encourage **follow-up care** to monitor for recurrence and therapy evaluation.
- Educate the client on the **purpose of corticosteroids**, timing, frequency, and the importance of adherence i.e. the negative effects of skipping or stopping therapy.
- Educate the client and their family on **checking blood pressure** and when to notify the physician.