---
tags:
  - B316
title: Addison's Disease
description: Addison's disease occurs when the adrenal cortex function is inadequate to meet the patient's need for cortical hormones.
---
Addison's disease occurs when the adrenal cortex function is inadequate to meet the patient's need for cortical hormones.
- Most cases result from **autoimmune or idiopathic atrophy of the adrenal glands**.
- **Surgical removal** or **infections** of the adrenal glands
- Inadequate secretion of **adrenocorticotropic hormone** (ACTH)
- **Adrenocortical insufficiency** most commonly results from therapeutic use of corticosteroids. Symptoms may result from **sudden cessation of exogenous adrenocortical hormonal therapy**, which **interferes with normal feedback mechanisms**.
___
# Assessment Findings
- **Muscle weakness**, **fatigue**, **emaciation**, **dark pigmentation of the skin and mucous membranes**, **hypotension**, **low blood glucose**, **low serum sodium**, and **high serum potassium**.
- Onset often begins with **non-specific symptoms**.
- **Mental changes** (depression, emotional liability, apathy, and confusion) are present in 60% to 80% of patients.
- **Disturbance of sodium and potassium** may be marked by **depletion of sodium and water** as well as **severe, chronic dehydration**.
___
# Diagnostic Examination
- **Greatly increased plasma ACTH** (more than 22.0 pmol/L) as the pituitary attempts to increase adrenal cortex hormone levels.
- **Serum cortisol levels are lower than normal** (less than 165 nmol/L).
- **Hypoglycemia**, **hyponatremia**, and **hyperkalemia** from decreased aldosterone levels.
- **Leukocytosis**
___
# Medical Management
**Combat circulatory shock**. **Restore blood circulation**, **administer fluids and corticosteroids**, monitor **vital signs**, and place the patient in a **recumbent position** with legs elevated.
- Administer **IV hydrocortisone**, followed by **D5NSS**.
- **Vasopressor amines** may be required if hypotension persists.
- **Antibiotics** may be administered if infections precipitate adrenal crisis.
- **Oral intake** should be initiated as soon as tolerable, and **salt is supplemented** to address GI losses, including through vomiting and diarrhea.
- If adrenal gland function is lost, **lifeline replacement of corticosteroids and mineralocorticoids**.
___
# Nursing Management
## Assessment
- Focus on assessment of ==**fluid balance**== and ==**stress**==.
- Monitor **blood pressure and pulse rate as the patient shifts between positions**. Findings may be indicative of **deficient fluid volume**.
- Assess **skin color** and **turgor**.
- Assess history of **weight change**, **muscle weakness**, and **fatigue**.
- Ask the patient and family about the **onset of illness** or **increased stress** that may have **precipitated the crisis**.
- Watch out for an **==Addisonian Crisis==**:
	- Monitor for S/S indicative of crisis, which can include **shock**, **hypotension**, **rapid and weak pulse**, **rapid respiratory rate**, **pallor**, and **extreme weakness**.
	- Advise the client to **avoid any physical and psychological stressors** such as cold exposure, overexertion, infection, and emotional distress.
	- Immediately treat with **IV fluids, glucose, electrolytes (especially sodium), replacement hormones, and vasopressors**.
## Intervention
1. **Restoring Fluid Balance**:
	- **Dietary adjustments** (esp. supplementation with salt) for fluid and electrolyte balance. Collaborate with a dietitian.
	- Instruct the patient and family for the prescription and administration of **hormone replacement therapy**, and to **adjust its dosage during illness and stress**.
	- Provide written and verbal instructions about the administration of mineralocorticoids (**Florinef**) or corticosteroids (**Prednisone**) as prescribed.
2. **Improving Activity Tolerance**:
	- Avoid unnecessary activities and stress that might **precipitate a hypotensive episode**.
	- Detect signs of **infection** or **presence of stressors** that might have triggered the crisis.
	- Explain the **rationale for minimizing stress during periods of acute crisis**.
3. **Promote Home-based and Community-based Care**:
	- Explicitly verbal and written instructions about the rationale for replacement therapy and proper dosage.
	- Teach the patient and family on how to modify drug dosage and increase in salt intake during period of illness, hot weather, and stressful situations.
		- Educate clients on **signs of excessive or insufficient hormone replacement**.
		- Provide **pre-loaded single-injection syringes of corticosteroids** for emergency use. Provide instructions for use.
	- Instruct patient to **modify diet and fluid intake** to **maintain fluid and electrolyte balance**.
	- Have the patient **inform any other health care provider** about the use of steroids.
	- Urge the patient to wear a medical alert bracelet and information about their needs.